Title: SAGE: Sink-Aware Grounded Decoding for Multimodal Hallucination Mitigation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.27898v1

Published Time: Tue, 31 Mar 2026 02:07:46 GMT

Number of Pages: 25

Markdown Content:
# SAGE: Sink-Aware Grounded Decoding for Multimodal Hallucination Mitigation 

Tripti Shukla and Zsolt Kira 

Georgia Institute of Technology 

{tshukla9,zkira}@gatech.edu 

Abstract. Large vision-language models (VLMs) frequently suffer from hallucinations, generating content that is inconsistent with visual in-puts. Existing methods typically address this problem through post-hoc filtering, additional training objectives, or external verification, but they do not intervene during the decoding process when hallucinations arise. In this work, we introduce SAGE , a Sink-Aware Grounded D ecoding framework that mitigates hallucinations by dynamically modulating self-attention during generation. Hallucinations are strongly correlated with 

attention sink tokens - punctuation or function tokens that accumu-late disproportionate attention despite carrying limited semantic con-tent. SAGE leverages these tokens as anchors to monitor grounding re-liability in real time. At each sink trigger, the method extracts semantic concepts from the generated sequence, estimates their visual ground-ing using both self-attention maps and gradient-based attribution, and measures their spatial agreement. Based on this signal, self-attention dis-tributions are adaptively sharpened or broadened to reinforce grounded regions or suppress unreliable ones. Extensive experiments across diverse hallucination benchmarks demonstrate that SAGE consistently outper-forms existing decoding strategies, achieving substantial reductions in hallucination while preserving descriptive coverage, without requiring model retraining or architectural modifications. Our method achieves an average relative improvement of 10.65% on MSCOCO and 7.19% on AM-BER across diverse VLM architectures, demonstrating consistent gains in hallucination mitigation. 

Keywords: Vision-Language Models · Hallucination Mitigation · At-tention Sink 

## 1 Introduction 

Large vision-language models (VLMs) [4, 8, 22, 27, 44, 60] achieve strong mul-timodal understanding and generation, yet frequently suffer from multimodal hallucination [25], producing content unsupported by the image. This limits their reliability in real-world deployment. Existing mitigation methods either require retraining with additional supervision [21, 24, 31] or applying training-free decoding heuristics [10,20,28,46]. The former increases cost and complexity, while the latter typically operates at the output level without exploiting internal grounding signals. 

> arXiv:2603.27898v1 [cs.CV] 29 Mar 2026

2 T. Shukla and Z. Kira LLaVA -1.5       

> “Please describe the image in
> detail.”
> A large red chair stands
> outdoors with a painted horse
> figure placed on its seat in front
> of a building .A small fountain
> and several people sitting on ...
> Hallucination!
> LLaVA -1.5
> w/ SAGE
> A large red chair stands
> outdoors with a painted horse
> figure placed on its seat in front
> of a building .Trees with thin
> branches are visible around the
> chair.
> No Hallucination
> Output tokens Output tokens
> Attention aggregation at
> Attention Sink token
> Attention recalibration at
> Attention Sink token
> Attention Sink token Attention Sink token

Fig. 1: We propose SAGE , a sink-aware grounded decoding strategy for mitigating hallucinations in VLMs. SAGE detects sink tokens during generation and dynamically recalibrates attention towards image tokens to produce visually grounded descriptions. 

Recent works have identified attention sinks - tokens that accumulate dis-proportionately high attention despite weak semantic contribution [18, 37, 47] as a structural phenomenon in transformers. In multimodal models, these to-kens often emerge during decoding and can dominate the attention distribu-tion, effectively diverting the model’s focus away from relevant visual evidence. While several works have connected attention sinks to hallucination behavior in VLMs [15, 28, 38, 53], they primarily treat them as artifacts to suppress, rather than potential signals that reveal when grounding failures are likely to occur. Also, most approaches rely solely on attention weights and do not incorporate complementary grounding cues from the vision encoder, limiting their ability to reliably detect misalignment between generated text and image content. As depicted in Figure 1, we propose SAGE: Sink-Aware Grounded Decod-ing , a training-free inference strategy that reinterprets sink tokens as grounding checkpoints during autoregressive generation. Our design is motivated by an em-pirical analysis on MSCOCO [23] and HalluBench [58], where we observe that 

88.4% of hallucination errors occur within five decoding steps after the generation of a sink token . This strong temporal correlation suggests that sink tokens frequently mark transition boundaries where the model shifts from describing one concept to initiating another - points at which grounding failures are more likely to occur. At each sink token, SAGE evaluates the visual grounding of the preceding segment using (i) multimodal self-attention over image tokens and (ii) gradient-based visual attribution. Their spatial agreement yields a real-time reliability sig-nal: high agreement reinforces attention over grounded regions, while low agree-ment redistributes attention toward alternative visual evidence. By selectively SAGE 3

modulating self-attention without retraining or architectural changes, SAGE ef-fectively reduces hallucination while preserving descriptive quality. 

Contributions: (1) We propose SAGE, a training-free decoding framework that leverages attention sink tokens as triggers for real-time visual grounding ver-ification during generation. (2) We introduce a reliability-driven attention mod-ulation mechanism based on the agreement between self-attention and gradient-based attribution to improve grounding. (3) Experiments on five LVLMs across multiple benchmarks show that SAGE consistently outperforms existing hallu-cination mitigation methods. 

## 2 Related Works 

VLM Hallucination Mitigation. A central cause of hallucination in VLMs is over-reliance on linguistic priors rather than visual evidence [42,56]. Training-time approaches mitigate this by introducing specialized modules [57] or curating datasets and augmentations that emphasize visual features [3, 32]; for example, HACL [16] employs contrastive learning over multimodal representations to dis-tinguish hallucinated responses from factual ones. However, such methods typ-ically incur substantial computational and engineering overhead. In contrast, inference-time methods are more flexible and can be broadly grouped into three families. Contrastive decoding [19, 41, 61] compares outputs under original and perturbed visual inputs to downweight prior-driven predictions, but requires additional forward passes for counterpart generations. Visual input modifica-tion emphasizes on the salient regions by altering the image (e.g., blurring, zooming, or cropping guided by intermediate signals) [29, 50, 52], which adds computational overhead and may struggle when evidence is spatially dispersed. Attention steering directly amplifies attention to visual tokens through fixed or proportional scaling [5, 28, 48, 53]. Our method also operates purely at inference time, but instead strengthens visual contributions and query–image alignment within intermediate layers without modifying the input. 

Attention Sink. Attention sink refers to the phenomenon where certain to-kens accumulate disproportionately high attention despite having limited se-mantic relevance. This behavior has been observed across LLMs [12, 47, 51], vi-sion transformers [9], and VLMs [18,62]. Existing approaches primarily mitigate this issue by recalibrating or redistributing attention during inference. For in-stance, OPERA [15] penalizes columnar attention patterns during beam search to reduce reliance on summary tokens, while DOPRA [45] refines this strategy through weighted overlay penalties and layer-wise redistribution. EAH [53] mit-igates vision sink effects by redistributing attention in shallow layers, whereas GIFT [33] leverages visual saliency maps to amplify attention toward visually relevant regions. 

## 3 Preliminaries 

Large Vision-Language Models. Large vision-language models (VLMs) such as LLaVA [26] consist of a visual encoder (e.g., CLIP [34]), a pretrained large 4 T. Shukla and Z. Kira 

language model (LLM), and a projection module (e.g., Q-Former [22], MLP [6]) that maps visual features into the language embedding space. Given an image I,the encoder produces vision tokens xV , which are combined with textual tokens 

xT and processed by the LLM for autoregressive generation: 

yt = arg max pθ (yt | y<t , x V , x T ),

where y<t denotes previously generated tokens. 

Transformer Attention. The LLM is a transformer with stacked multi-head self-attention layers. For head i in layer l, attention is computed as 

Al,i (Xl) = softmax 

 QK ⊤

√dk



V, 

where Q, K, V are linear projections of the input tokens. During autoregressive generation, attention operates jointly over visual tokens xV and previously gen-erated text y<t . We denote the attention output corresponding to token yt at layer l and head i as Al,i (yt | y<t , x V , x T ), which captures the alignment between generated tokens and visual context. 

## 4 Attention Sink 

Transformer-based models rely on self-attention to distribute contextual infor-mation across tokens during autoregressive decoding [40]. However, empirical analysis show that attention is often unevenly distributed: a small subset of to-kens consistently accumulates disproportionately high incoming attention across layers and heads. This behavior, referred to as the attention sink phenomenon, was first identified in large language models [47], where initial tokens attract excessive attention despite limited semantic contribution. A key reason for this behavior lies in the Softmax normalization within self-attention. Since attention weights must sum-to-one, and initial tokens remain visible at every decoding step, they repeatedly absorb redundant attention. Over time, this leads to persistent columnar attention patterns, where subsequent to-kens route a significant portion of their attention to these sink tokens, effectively turning them into aggregation hubs. In multimodal large vision-language models (LVLMs), this imbalance be-comes particularly problematic because textual and visual tokens compete within the same attention space and excessive routing toward sink tokens reduces atten-tion allocated to image tokens. As a result, visual evidence is underutilized, and the model increasingly relies on autoregressive textual priors. This imbalance can dominate token prediction and ultimately manifest as hallucination [15]. These observations motivate the need for decoding strategies that explicitly identify and regulate attention sinks to preserve visual grounding and mitigate halluci-nations. 

Sink Token Analysis. Our focus on attention sink tokens is motivated by an empirical analysis on MSCOCO [23] and HalluBench [58]. We observe that 88.4% SAGE 5

of hallucination errors occur within five decoding steps after the generation of a sink token. This strong temporal correlation indicates that sink tokens frequently mark transition boundaries where the model shifts from describing one concept to initiating another - points at which grounding failures are more likely to occur. At these transition points, the model aggregates substantial contextual at-tention from preceding tokens while contributing minimal new semantic content. Prior work has shown that punctuation tokens often behave as attention sinks ,accumulating disproportionately high attention despite weak semantic mean-ing [1, 2, 14]. Such tokens - typically punctuation marks (e.g., periods, commas, colons, semicolons, dashes, ellipses) and lightweight conjunctions (e.g., “and”, “or”) exhibit persistent columnar attention patterns and act as aggregation hubs during decoding. Our empirical analysis in multimodal generation reveals a simi-lar phenomenon, where these structurally lightweight tokens consistently attract high attention and frequently precede hallucination errors. Based on this observation, we treat these sink tokens as hallucination predic-tion anchors during decoding. Whenever a sink token is generated, it triggers a targeted grounding verification step in our framework. By intervening at these natural structural boundaries, our method proactively detects and mitigates hal-lucination before it propagates to subsequent tokens. 

## 5 Methodology 

We introduce a sink-triggered grounded decoding strategy that dynamically modulates multimodal self-attention based on grounding reliability during in-ference. Our approach is built on the observation that hallucinations frequently emerge around attention sink tokens - tokens that accumulate disproportion-ate attention while contributing little semantic content. SAGE intervenes pre-cisely at these sink positions to assess whether the generation remains visually grounded, as depicted in Figure 2. At each detected sink token, we first extract key semantic concepts from the partially generated text. We then estimate visual grounding through two complementary signals: ( 1) the spatial self-attention map corresponding to the sink token projected onto visual tokens, and ( 2) gradient-based visual attribu-tion (Grad-CAM) computed from the final layer of the vision encoder for the extracted concepts. To quantify grounding reliability, we compute a spatial over-lap score between these two maps. This overlap serves as a real-time reliability indicator that guides attention modulation. High agreement indicates consis-tent grounding and prompts the model to reinforce attention within the same spatial regions, thereby strengthening reliable visual evidence. In contrast, low agreement signals potential misalignment and triggers the model to redistribute attention toward alternative image regions to mitigate emerging hallucinations. The complete decoding procedure is summarized in Algorithm 1. Through this selective, sink-triggered intervention, SAGE provides a training-free mech-anism for improving visual grounding while preserving generative fluency. 6 T. Shukla and Z. Kira Describe the image in detail. 

> Visual
> Encoder
> Projector
> LLM
> Decoder

. , & and or : ; - ~ …          

> Output tokens
> Sink
> Token
> Attention Sink Vocabulary
> Output tokens
> Attention map
> from
> intermediate
> layers of LLM, A
> POS Tagging
> Key Concepts, C
> A grey cat
> wearing a
> green tie is
> resting on a
> sofa ,...
> cat, tie,
> sofa
> Spatial attention map for
> sink token, 𝒊 𝟏
> Visual grounding map
> for C, 𝒊 𝟐
> Overlap Score, o = 0.34
> Since o < 𝝉 ,
> Diffuse Attention
> (Spread across other
> regions)

Stage 1      

> 𝐴 ←𝛼 #𝐴 ,𝛼 #<1

Stage 2 

Stage 3 

Fig. 2: Overview of our inference-time decoding strategy, SAGE . Stage 1: SAGE identifies attention sink tokens and extracts key semantic concepts C from the par-tially generated output. Stage 2: We project the sink-token attention onto the im-age to obtain an attention-based grounding map i1, and compute concept-level visual grounding i2 using Grad-CAM from the final layer of the vision encoder. An overlap score o is then calculated between the two maps. Stage 3: Based on a threshold τ ,SAGE adaptively modulates attention: when o < τ , attention is diffused to explore alternative image regions; otherwise, attention is reinforced to strengthen grounding in the same regions. 

Autoregressive Generation and Sink Detection. To mitigate hallucina-tion, we augment the standard autoregressive decoding procedure with a sink detection mechanism that operates continuously during decoding. Building upon our analysis in Sec. 4, which demonstrates a strong correlation between attention sink tokens and hallucination events, we monitor generated tokens in real-time. Specifically, we classify a token as a potential attention sink if it belongs to a predefined set of punctuation marks and connective elements. This set includes boundary symbols (periods, commas, colons, semicolons, dashes, ellipses), coor-dinating conjunctions (e.g., "and", "or"), and similar structural tokens. While these tokens serve essential syntactic functions as phrase boundaries, they typ-ically convey minimal semantic information, making them susceptible to accu-mulating disproportionate attention weights. 

Key Concept Extraction. Once an attention sink token is detected during decoding, we treat it as a semantic boundary: the tokens generated since the pre-vious sink form a coherent descriptive segment. At each boundary, we extract key concepts from this newly generated segment i.e., tokens most likely to correspond SAGE 7

Algorithm 1 Sink-Aware Grounded Decoding with Attention Modulation                                                            

> 1: Initialize sequence S← ∅
> 2: while end-of-sequence not reached do
> 3: Sample next token tand append to S
> 4: if tis a designated sink token then
> 5: Extract key concepts Cusing POS tagging 6: Obtain self-attention weights Aof token tfrom middle decoder layers, re-stricted to image tokens 7: Compute spatial attention map i1by projecting Aonto the image plane 8: Compute visual grounding map i2←S
> c∈CGradCAM( I, c )
> 9: Compute overlap score o←IoU( i1, i 2)
> 10: if o > τ then
> 11: Reinforce attention: A←α1A, where α1>1
> 12: else
> 13: Diffuse attention: A←α2A, where α2<1
> 14: end if
> 15: end if
> 16: end while
> 17: return generated sequence S

to visual entities or attributes and use them both to assess the grounding of the current segment and to modulate subsequent decoding via attention control. We operationalize this step using spaCy’s part-of-speech (POS) [30] based concept identification strategy. Specifically, we apply POS tagging to the cur-rent output segment and extract tokens belonging to categories that typically carry high visual grounding potential. These include nouns, which usually de-note objects or scene entities; adjectives, which describe visual attributes such as color, texture, or size; and compound noun phrases, which capture semantically complete units (e.g., “red sports car” or “wooden dining table”). By focusing on these categories, we ensure that grounding verification operates on concept-level semantic units rather than individual tokens. This concept-level abstraction is crucial for two reasons. First, it reduces noise introduced by syntactic or functional tokens such as determiners, prepositions, or auxiliary verbs, which do not have direct visual correspondences. Second, it aligns the grounding process with how humans interpret visual descriptions - as collections of meaningful entities and attributes rather than isolated words. As a result, this step provides a robust set of candidate concepts that both underpin the grounding and attribution analysis of the current segment and guide the model’s future decoding behavior. 

Self-Attention Grounding Estimation. After identifying key concepts from the output sequence before the sink token, the next step is to estimate the model’s internal visual grounding for these concepts. We achieve this by analyz-ing self-attention maps that capture the interaction between textual tokens and visual tokens within the multimodal transformer. 

Attention Extraction and Region Construction. In multimodal transformers, self-attention layers encode alignment between generated text tokens and image to-8 T. Shukla and Z. Kira Last layer of Image Encoder 

> Input Image
> Mirror
> Man
> Loafer
> Aggregate Spatial Attention Map
> ∪

Fig. 3: (a) Layer-wise analysis showing the average IoU between spatial self-attention maps of ground-truth object tokens and their corresponding bounding boxes, alongside attention entropy. Results are averaged over 500 images from MSCOCO. (b) Grad-CAM visualizations from the final layer of the vision encoder for individual concepts and their union. 

kens, providing a direct signal of grounding. For each detected attention sink token, we extract its self-attention weights over image tokens from intermediate transformer layers, selecting the attention head with the highest average atten-tion mass on visual tokens at the sink position (see Sec. 6 for layer selection). We then project these weights into the image plane to obtain a spatial ground-ing map, denoted i1, which highlights the regions the model attends to when generating the corresponding textual content and serves as its internal estimate of the relevant visual evidence. 

Gradient-Based Visual Attribution. To obtain an independent and causally grounded estimate of visual evidence, we complement self-attention analysis with gradient-based visual attribution. While self-attention reflects where the model attends during generation, it does not guarantee that those regions are causally responsible for predicting specific concepts. We therefore employ Grad-CAM [36] to derive an external grounding signal based on prediction sensitivity. We an-alyze the impact of the Grad-CAM component through an ablation study in 

Appendix (Sec. 8.2) .For each extracted key concept c ∈ C identified prior to a sink trigger, we compute a concept-specific attribution map using Grad-CAM applied to the final-layer visual feature maps of the vision encoder [54]. Importantly, the super-vision signal does not originate from predefined visual classes or from the vision encoder itself. Instead, it is derived directly from the autoregressive decoder’s output logit corresponding to the concept token c.Concretely, let yc denote the decoder logit associated with token c in the generated sequence, and let Avision represent the final-layer visual feature activa-tions. We backpropagate ∂y c/∂A vision through the multimodal transformer and compute Grad-CAM over Avision , yielding a spatial attribution map that high-lights the image regions most influential for predicting c in the current context. Since multiple concepts may be extracted before a sink token, we aggregate their attribution maps into a unified grounding representation as illustrated in Figure 3 b). Each concept-level Grad-CAM map is first thresholded to obtain a binary mask i(c)2 , and we compute their pixel-wise union: i2 = S 

> c∈C

i(c)2 , where the union is implemented as a pixel-wise logical OR. The resulting region i2

serves as an external grounding reference independent of attention dynamics. SAGE 9

Unlike attention maps, which reflect internal information flow, gradient-based attribution provides a causal signal directly tied to prediction sensitivity, mak-ing it a more reliable reference for grounding verification. 

Grounding Reliability Estimation. To assess the reliability of the model’s attention-based grounding signal, we evaluate the spatial consistency between the grounding induced by a detected sink token and the independently computed gradient-based attribution map for the extracted key concepts in C. Specifically, for each identified sink token, we measure the spatial overlap between this sink-conditioned grounding map i1 and the aggregated Grad-CAM-based map i2

using the Intersection-over-Union (IoU) metric: o = IoU( i1, i 2).

This overlap score serves as a quantitative measure of spatial agreement be-tween the sink token’s attention distribution and the gradient-based attribution of the extracted concepts. A high overlap value indicates that the regions cur-rently emphasized by attention substantially coincide with the image areas that are causally influential for concept prediction. In this case, the model is already focusing on relevant visual evidence, and reinforcing attention within these re-gions can strengthen grounding consistency. Conversely, a low overlap indicates spatial misalignment between attention and attribution. This suggests that the current attention distribution does not adequately cover the regions most re-sponsible for the predicted concepts, motivating a redistribution of attention toward alternative image areas. Importantly, both scenarios arise at sink tokens, which represent structurally sensitive transition points in generation. The overlap score therefore does not classify tokens as hallucinated or grounded; rather, it determines the appropriate corrective action, i.e. whether to reinforce existing attention patterns or to diffuse attention to encourage broader visual exploration. 

Sink-Aware Attention Modulation. Attention distributions in multimodal transformers are not inherently reliable indicators of visual grounding [47]. At sink tokens, attention may either under-cover relevant image regions or concen-trate on irrelevant areas, resulting in spatial misalignment with the visual evi-dence supporting the predicted concepts. To address this, we dynamically modu-late the multimodal self-attention distribution based on the estimated grounding reliability score. Rather than treating attention weights as fixed, we adapt them according to their spatial agreement with an independent gradient-based refer-ence: high overlap leads to reinforcement of the aligned regions, while low overlap triggers attention diffusion to encourage broader visual exploration. Specifically, the overlap score between the attention-based and gradient-based grounding regions serves as a reliability signal. When this score exceeds a prede-fined threshold (empirically set to 0.5 in our experiments), the attention distri-bution is considered spatially consistent with the gradient-based attribution, as depicted in Figure 4. In this case, we reinforce the existing attention pattern by sharpening it, thereby increasing the relative weight assigned to the most highly attended visual tokens. This operation encourages the model to maintain strong focus on correctly grounded visual evidence and promotes faithful continuation of generation. Conversely, when the overlap falls below the threshold, the attention 10 T. Shukla and Z. Kira Describe the image in detail.            

> o = 0.59
> A sunflower
> bouquet sits in a
> tall blue glass
> bottle against a
> brick wall ,a
> small watering
> can and
> gardening gloves
> are placed beside
> it.
> A sunflower
> bouquet sits in a
> tall blue glass
> bottle against a
> brick wall ,only
> flowers and
> leaves are visible
> with no other
> objects nearby.
> o > 𝝉
> Reinforce Attention
> Describe the image in detail.
> o = 0.24
> A young girl
> wearing a pink
> hat stands on a
> sandy path near
> grassy dunes and
> colorful balloons
> are floating in the
> sky behind her.
> A young girl
> wearing a pink
> hat stands on a
> sandy path near
> grassy dunes
> and she is flying
> a small kite in
> the sky.
> o < 𝝉
> Diffuse Attention

Fig. 4: Qualitative results of SAGE, including sink-token spatial attention, GradCAM-derived visual grounding maps, the computed overlap score o, and the modulated spatial attention maps. The sink token is highlighted in red. 

pattern is treated as unreliable. Such scenarios typically correspond to diffuse attention distributions or cases where the model focuses on visually irrelevant regions, both of which are strongly associated with hallucination. To mitigate this risk, we broaden the attention distribution by reducing its concentration. 

A ← α1A, α1 > 1, A ← α2A, α2 < 1.

This softens over-confident attention peaks and allows the model to redis-tribute attention toward alternative visual regions that may contain relevant evidence. A detailed ablation analysis of the threshold selection and modulation strategy along with schedules that trigger modulation at fixed periods instead of sink tokens is provided in the Appendix (Sec. 8.3) .This adaptive modulation mechanism is applied selectively at attention sink points during decoding, enabling targeted intervention precisely when the model transitions between semantic units. As a result, the proposed approach provides an effective and lightweight strategy for steering attention toward reliable visual grounding without disrupting the overall auto-regressive generation process. 

## 6 Experiments 

Models and Baselines. We evaluate the effectiveness of our method across five representative multimodal large language models (MLLMs) that differ in their visual feature projection mechanisms. Specifically, we consider two models that employ simple linear projection layers, LLaVA-1.5-7b [26] and Shikra [4], which directly align visual and textual features and feed dense image tokens SAGE 11 

(typically 256 or 576 tokens) into the language model. We also include two Q-Former [22] based models, MiniGPT-4 [60] and InstructBLIP [8], where a Query Transformer compresses visual representations into a fixed set of learnable query tokens (e.g., 32 tokens), enabling more compact cross-modal alignment in the language embedding space. All evaluated models utilize strong pretrained vision encoders, such as CLIP [34] or EVA [11], together with pretrained large language models including LLaMA [39] or Vicuna [59]. In addition, we benchmark our method on Qwen2-VL-7B [44], a recent state-of-the-art multimodal model featuring a dynamic-resolution vision transformer and tighter cross-modal integration through decoder cross-attention. Unlike projector or Q-Former-based designs, Qwen2-VL directly incorporates adaptively tokenized visual features into the language model, allowing efficient high-resolution processing while maintaining fine-grained visual grounding. This diverse set of architectures enables a comprehensive evaluation of our method across distinct multimodal integration paradigms. We compare our method against several representative hallucination mitiga-tion methods. OPERA [15] enhances beam search with an optimized decoding strategy. HALC [7] modifies global and local visual context to suppress halluci-nations. EAH [53] identifies vision sink tokens and adjusts shallow-layer atten-tion. DML-LVLM [17] redistributes visual attention across heads at inference time. GIFT [33] computes a holistic visual saliency map via gaze shifts and am-plifies salient regions during decoding. LVLMs-Saliency [55] dynamically filters candidate tokens based on contextual saliency. We provide the details of our implementation setup in the Appendix (Sec. 8.1) .

Benchmarks. We evaluate SAGE across a diverse set of hallucination detection benchmarks designed to measure both factual correctness and visual grounding in multimodal generation. These benchmarks assess complementary aspects of hallucination: whether generated descriptions mention objects not present in the image, and whether they sufficiently cover true visual content. In particular, we use the widely adopted CHAIR metric on MSCOCO to quantify object halluci-nation, and evaluate both CHAIR and Cover metrics on the AMBER benchmark to jointly assess hallucination and object coverage. 

CHAIR Evaluation on MSCOCO. We first evaluate hallucination using the 

Caption Hallucination Assessment with Image Relevance (CHAIR) [35] metric on the MSCOCO dataset [23]. CHAIR is specifically designed to measure object hallucination in image captioning by comparing objects mentioned in generated descriptions with ground-truth object annotations. It computes the proportion of objects that appear in the caption but are absent from the image labels. CHAIR provides two complementary variants: per-sentence, or what fraction of sentences include a hallucinated object (denoted as CHAIR S ) and per-instance, or what fraction of object instances are hallucinated (denoted as CHAIR I ). 

CI = |{ hallucinated objects }| |{ all mentioned objects }| CS = |{ captions with hallucinated objects }| |{ all captions }| 

We conduct CHAIR evaluation on the MSCOCO dataset, which contains over 300,000 images annotated with 80 object categories; full details of the sampling 12 T. Shukla and Z. Kira 

Table 1: CHAIR ↓ results on MSCOCO for LVLMs with different decoding baselines aimed at hallucination mitigation. CS and CI denote CHAIR S and CHAIR I , respec-tively. Blue text indicates the relative reduction (%) achieved by SAGE over the best competing baseline (lower is better). All reported scores are averaged over generations with maximum lengths of 256 and 512 tokens. Method LLaVA-1.5 Shikra MiniGPT-4 InstructBLIP Qwen2-VL-7B 

CS ↓ CI ↓ CS ↓ CI ↓ CS ↓ CI ↓ CS ↓ CI ↓ CS ↓ CI ↓

OPERA 45.2 12.4 37.2 12.3 26.0 9.1 46.7 14.6 23.7 7.1 HALC 36.9 9.8 38.3 15.9 28.5 10.3 49.4 14.2 22.5 6.9 EAH 37.8 10.4 47.5 13.2 30.7 9.9 56.4 9.9 22.4 6.5 DML-LVLM 25.7 7.2 24.6 9.9 23.5 8.8 32.5 13.8 25.7 7.2 GIFT 37.4 9.6 33.5 11.7 29.3 10.2 38.8 11.9 22.5 8.1 LVLMs-Saliency 36.2 8.8 31.6 10.2 27.4 9.1 35.3 10.2 20.1 5.4 

SAGE (Ours) 21.3 

> (+17.1%)

5.2 

> (+27.8%)

24.3 

> (+1.2%)

8.7 

> (+12.1%)

23.8 

> (+1.3%)

8.2 

> (+6.8%)

25.7 

> (+20.9%)

9.4 

> (+5.1%)

21.1 

> (+4.9%)

5.9 

> (+9.3%)

protocol, prompts, and decoding setup are provided in the Appendix (Sec. 8.4) . As evident from Table 1, SAGE consistently achieves lower CHAIR S and 

CHAIR I scores than all competing decoding methods across the five LVLM backbones, indicating substantially reduced hallucination. For example, on LLaVA-1.5-7b SAGE reduces CHAIR S from 25.7 to 21.3 and CHAIR I from 7.2 to 5.2 (17.1% and 27.8% relative reductions) with consistent gains on other architec-tures. The average relative improvement on MSCOCO is 10.65% across vlm backbones. 

CHAIR and Cover Evaluation on AMBER. To further evaluate caption-ing quality beyond hallucination detection, we conduct experiments on the AM-BER [43] benchmark, a multi-dimensional evaluation suite designed to assess multimodal generation without reliance on external language models. AMBER enables simultaneous measurement of hallucination and object coverage, provid-ing a more comprehensive assessment of grounding performance. In addition to CHAIR, AMBER introduces the Cover metric, which mea-sures how well generated descriptions capture true visual content. Specifically, Cover quantifies the proportion of ground-truth objects that are correctly men-tioned in the response: Cover (R) = |R′ 

> obj ∩Aobj ||Aobj |

, where R′ 

> obj

denotes objects ex-tracted from the generated response, and Aobj denotes ground-truth annotated objects. An ideal model achieves low hallucination while maintaining high cov-erage of image content. For evaluation, we use the standard generative prompt and randomly sample 500 instances from the 1,004 available datapoints in AMBER; full details are in the Appendix (Sec. 8.5) . We report both CHAIR I and Cover scores to assess the trade-off between hallucination reduction and descriptive completeness. As observed in Table 2, SAGE not only reduces hallucination but also preserves or improves object coverage, demonstrating its ability to improve factual ground-ing without sacrificing descriptive quality. For instance, on LLaVA-1.5, SAGE SAGE 13 

Table 2: CHAIR ↓ and Cover ↑ results on AMBER for LVLMs with different decoding baselines aimed at hallucination mitigation. CI and CR denote CHAIR I and Cover, respectively. Blue text indicates the relative improvement (%) achieved by SAGE over the best competing baseline (lower is better for CI , higher is better for CR). All reported scores are averaged over generations with maximum lengths of 256 and 512 tokens. Method LLaVA-1.5 Shikra MiniGPT-4 InstructBLIP Qwen2-VL-7B 

CI ↓ CR ↑ CI ↓ CR ↑ CI ↓ CR ↑ CI ↓ CR ↑ CI ↓ CR ↑

OPERA 12.1 45.3 11.2 42.6 10.3 50.4 12.2 48.7 8.8 52.4 HALC 9.7 51.7 16.2 39.6 11.1 53.6 13.1 49.3 7.8 54.7 EAH 11.3 48.4 12.6 52.3 10.6 54.5 10.7 49.1 7.1 55.2 DML-LVLM 7.8 52.6 9.2 46.7 8.9 47.4 13.6 44.3 8.1 51.6 GIFT 8.9 50.6 10.2 47.2 9.6 41.8 11.2 39.4 6.3 58.7 LVLMs-Saliency 7.9 51.3 9.6 50.8 8.4 56.7 9.6 46.9 6.7 64.9 

SAGE (Ours) 6.9 

> (+11.5%)

57.2 

> (+0.9%)

8.3 

> (+9.8%)

53.4 

> (+2.1%)

7.6 

> (+9.5%)

53.2 

> (+2.9%)

8.2 

> (+14.6%)

55.7 

> (+13.1%)

6.1 

> (+3.2%)

61.5 

> (+4.3%)

achieves the best CI score of 6.9 (a 11.5% relative reduction over the next-best baseline) while also attaining the highest Cover score of 57.2, showcasing a strong balance between faithfulness and completeness across all five LVLM backbones. 

Gemini-3-Pro Based Human-Aligned Evaluation. To assess hallucina-tions from a human-aligned perspective, we employ a strong multimodal judge, Gemini 3 Pro [13], following [49]. We randomly sample 100 images from the MSCOCO validation set and generate detailed captions using the prompt “Please describe this image in detail.” for GIFT [33], LVLMs-Saliency [55], and SAGE on LLaVA-1.5 and Qwen2-VL-7B. For evaluation, Gemini 3 Pro is provided with the input image and three candidate responses simultaneously for each model, and is asked to assign comparative scores (0-10) along two dimensions: accuracy 

and detailedness . The prompt explicitly instructs the judge to penalize hallu-cinations, including non-existent objects and incorrect attributes (e.g., color, position, or relationships), and is designed to be order-invariant to mitigate po-sitional bias. This protocol serves as a proxy for human evaluation given Gem-ini 3 Pro’s strong multimodal reasoning capabilities. The evaluation prompt is provided in the Appendix (Sec. 8.6) . As shown in Table 3, SAGE consistently achieves higher scores, indicating improved factual correctness while maintaining rich descriptions. We provide a detailed runtime analysis and additional qualitative results in the Appendix (Secs.8.7 and 8.8) .

Transformer Layer Analysis. To justify our choice of layers for extracting attention maps, we conduct an analysis-only study using two complementary metrics: object localization accuracy and attention entropy . We first extract the ground-truth concepts from the generated output sequence and use the cor-responding self-attention weights. For localization, these concept-specific self-attention weights at each layer are projected into spatial heatmaps over the image to obtain attention-based grounding regions. These regions are then com-14 T. Shukla and Z. Kira                          

> Table 3: Gemini 3 Pro-based evaluation results. Astands for accuracy and Dstands for detailedness .Method LLaVA-1.5 Qwen2-vl-7b
> ADAD
> GIFT [33] 4.34.76.56.8
> LVLMs-Saliency [55] 5.65.96.15.8
> SAGE(Ours) 6.9 6.6 8.2 8.1

pared against ground-truth bounding boxes using Intersection-over-Union (IoU). In parallel, we quantify attention concentration by computing the entropy of the normalized attention distribution. 

IoU( l) = |R(l) 

> attn

∩ RGT ||R(l) 

> attn

∪ RGT | , H(l) = − X

> i

A(l) 

> i

log A(l)

> i

where R(l) 

> attn

denotes the attention-derived region at layer l, and RGT denotes the ground-truth object regions and A(l) 

> i

is the attention weight assigned to image token i at layer l. Lower entropy corresponds to more spatially focused attention. Results are averaged over 500 images randomly sampled from the MSCOCO validation set. As shown in Figure 3 a), both analysis reveal a consistent trend: early layers yield low IoU and high entropy, indicative of coarse, globally distributed pro-cessing; middle layers attain the highest IoU and lowest entropy, reflecting the most precise and semantically aligned grounding; and later layers show decreas-ing IoU and rising entropy, suggesting a shift toward predominantly linguistic processing. These observations support our use of middle transformer layers as providing the most informative signals for visual-semantic alignment. 

## 7 Conclusion 

We introduced SAGE , a sink-aware grounded decoding strategy for mitigating hallucinations in large vision–language models. SAGE treats attention sink to-kens as semantic checkpoints during autoregressive generation, triggering concept-level grounding checks and dynamic modulation of attention over visual tokens. By combining internal self-attention signals with gradient-based visual attribu-tion, our method provides a training-free and interpretable mechanism for im-proving visual grounding at inference time. Experiments across multiple bench-marks show that SAGE consistently reduces hallucinations while preserving de-scriptive quality. A limitation of SAGE is its reliance on sink tokens as intervention points. As a result, it is less effective for tasks with very short outputs (e.g., single-word or short-phrase answers), where such tokens may rarely occur. Extending grounded decoding to these settings is an important direction for future work. Additional failure cases are provided in the Appendix (Sec. 8.9) .SAGE 15 

## 8 Appendix 

8.1 Implementation Details 

We evaluate our method on two widely used benchmarks for image captioning hallucination: CHAIR [35] on the MSCOCO dataset [23], and AMBER [43]. Key semantic concepts are extracted from the generated sequence using spaCy-based part-of-speech (POS) tagging [30]. We define sink tokens as punctuation marks and lightweight function tokens that frequently accumulate attention during de-coding. The set used in our experiments includes punctuation tokens (., „ :, ;, !, ?, -, –, ...) and conjunctions (and, or, but, so, yet). The hyperparameters α1, α2, and τ are tuned on small validation subsets consisting of 200 samples from each dataset. We select α1 from [ 0.3, 0.5, 0.6, 0.8]. For LLaVA-1.5 [27], Shikra [4], MiniGPT-4 [60], and InstructBLIP [8], α1 is set to 0.6, while for Qwen2-VL-7B [44] it is set to 0.3. Similarly, α2 is chosen from [1.2, 1.5, 1.8, 2.0] and set to 1.2 for Qwen2-VL-7B and 1.8 for the remaining mod-els. The overlap threshold τ is set to 0.5. Detailed ablation results are provided in Table 5. Overall, we observe that SAGE remains robust to moderate variations of these hyperparameters across benchmarks. Following [54], Grad-CAM is computed using the feature maps from the final layer of the vision encoder, as they capture rich high-level semantic information while retaining spatial structure. 

8.2 Importance of Grad-CAM 

To highlight the role of Grad-CAM [36], we conduct an ablation study where the gradient-based attribution component is removed. Instead of computing the overlap between Grad-CAM maps from the final layer of the image encoder and the self-attention maps from intermediate LLM decoder layers, we rely solely on the spatial attention maps and apply a fixed overlap threshold of 0.5 with respect to the image area to decide whether to reinforce or diffuse attention. As shown in Table 4, the full method with Grad-CAM consistently outperforms this variant. This demonstrates that Grad-CAM provides valuable concept-level visual attribution from the vision encoder, enabling more reliable grounding signals than attention maps alone. 

Table 4: CHAIR ↓ results on MSCOCO for SAGE with and without Grad-CAM. CS

and CI denote CHAIR S and CHAIR I , respectively. All reported scores are averaged over generations with maximum lengths of 256 and 512 tokens. Method LLaVA-1.5 Shikra MiniGPT-4 InstructBLIP Qwen2-VL-7B                                       

> CS↓CI↓CS↓CI↓CS↓CI↓CS↓CI↓CS↓CI↓
> SAGE w/o Grad-CAM 47.4 13.2 50.8 13.9 49.6 14.6 54.2 13.7 38.3 11.2 SAGE (Ours) 21.3 5.2 24.3 8.7 23.8 8.2 25.7 9.4 21.1 5.9

16 T. Shukla and Z. Kira 

8.3 Ablation Analysis for Attention Modulation 

Table 5: Ablation study of SAGE hyperparameters α1, α2, and τ on MSCOCO. We report CS , CI , and F 1 for LLaVA-1.5b and Qwen2-vl-7b. Lower values are better for CS

and CI , while higher is better for F 1. All reported scores are generated with maximum lengths of 512 tokens. Hyperparameters LLaVA-1.5 Qwen2-VL-7B 

α1 α2 τ CS ↓ CI ↓ F 1 ↑ CS ↓ CI ↓ F 1 ↑

Reinforce only ( α1 = 0 )

0.0 1.2 0.5 56.7 14.7 50.6 49.9 13.8 58.9 0.0 1.5 0.5 57.2 14.8 47.7 50.3 13.9 56.7 0.0 1.8 0.5 57.9 15.3 48.0 53.7 14.2 55.2 0.0 2.0 0.5 59.3 15.2 48.7 54.2 14.3 53.2 

Diffuse only ( α2 = 0 )

0.3 0.0 0.5 55.2 14.8 48.2 50.3 13.6 54.2 0.6 0.0 0.5 57.4 14.9 46.4 48.5 13.4 52.7 0.8 0.0 0.5 56.1 15.3 47.8 48.9 12.9 53.6 1.0 0.0 0.5 55.8 14.9 49.3 46.7 13.2 55.4 

Both modulations active 

0.3 1.8 0.5 39.7 11.1 63.7 41.7 10.1 69.2 0.3 1.2 0.5 32.1 8.8 76.2 27.3 6.4 87.4 

0.5 1.5 0.5 35.2 12.5 67.2 39.1 9.7 71.6 0.6 1.2 0.5 37.9 10.7 72.4 41.4 9.1 75.3 0.6 1.8 0.5 29.7 7.5 84.0 36.2 9.4 79.3 0.8 1.0 0.5 38.2 11.3 83.1 37.2 10.4 70.3 

We perform an ablation analysis on the hyperparameters α1, α2, and τ , and additionally study the role of sink tokens by applying attention modulation at fixed intervals (every 10 decoding steps) instead of using sink-triggered check-points. Table 5 reports the results on MSCOCO for LLaVA-1.5 and Qwen2-VL-7B. As observed in Table 5, when only the broadening mechanism is active (α2 = 0 ), attention is diffused across image regions, which weakens grounding signals and leads to higher hallucination rates and lower F1 scores. Conversely, enabling only the sharpening mechanism ( α1 = 0 ) concentrates attention on previously attended regions but lacks the ability to recover from incorrect fo-cus, resulting in limited improvements. The best performance is achieved when both mechanisms are active, allowing the model to adaptively reinforce reliable regions while redistributing attention when grounding is uncertain. Furthermore, as shown in Table 6, replacing sink-triggered modulation with fixed-step intervention (every 10 decoding steps) leads to noticeably worse perfor-mance across all metrics. This degradation indicates that arbitrary intervention SAGE 17 

points are less effective, as they may occur when the model is already grounded or before grounding failures emerge. In contrast, sink tokens naturally correspond to transition points in generation where the model shifts between semantic con-cepts, making them reliable checkpoints for grounding verification and targeted attention modulation. 

Table 6: Ablation study of the modulation strategy on MSCOCO. We compare pe-riodic modulation applied every 10 decoding steps with our sink-triggered modulation strategy. CS and CI denote CHAIR S and CHAIR I , respectively. All reported scores are averaged over generations with maximum lengths of 256 and 512 tokens. Method LLaVA-1.5 Shikra MiniGPT-4 InstructBLIP Qwen2-VL-7B                                       

> CS↓CI↓CS↓CI↓CS↓CI↓CS↓CI↓CS↓CI↓
> Periodic Modulation (every 10 tokens) 39.4 12.5 41.3 12.9 39.9 13.1 38.2 11.7 34.6 10.8 Sink-triggered Modulation (SAGE) 21.3 5.2 24.3 8.7 23.8 8.2 25.7 9.4 21.1 5.9

8.4 CHAIR Evaluation on MSCOCO 

We evaluate hallucination using the CHAIR metric [35] on the MSCOCO dataset [23], which contains over 300,000 images annotated with 80 object categories. Fol-lowing standard practice, we randomly sample 500 images from the COCO-2014 validation split. For each image, captions are generated using the prompt “Please describe this image in detail.” under an autoregressive decoding setup. To en-sure fair comparison across methods, we keep all decoding settings identical and evaluate generations with maximum token lengths of 256 and 512. The reported results correspond to the average performance across these two gener-ation settings. Hallucination is quantified using both CHAIR S (sentence-level hallucination rate) and CHAIR I (instance-level hallucination rate), which mea-sure the presence of objects in the generated caption that are not present in the ground-truth annotations. 

8.5 CHAIR and COVER Evaluation on AMBER 

For evaluation on AMBER [43], we follow the standard generative protocol and use the prompt “Describe this image in detail.” . From the 1,004 available dat-apoints in the benchmark, we randomly sample 500 images for evaluation. To assess both hallucination and descriptive completeness, we report the CHAIR I

metric alongside the Cover score. While CHAIR I measures the rate of hallu-cinated object instances that are not present in the image, Cover evaluates the extent to which objects present in the image are correctly mentioned in the generated caption. This combination allows us to analyze the trade-off between reducing hallucinations and maintaining comprehensive image descriptions. 18 T. Shukla and Z. Kira 

8.6 Gemini-3-Pro Evaluation 

Below is the system prompt given to Gemini-3-Pro [13] for evaluation: You are an expert evaluator for multimodal AI systems. Your task is to assess the quality of image descriptions generated by multiple AI assistants. The goal is to determine which descriptions best reflect the actual visual content of the image. You must carefully compare the image with each response and evaluate them according to two criteria: Accuracy and Detailedness .

Hallucination Definition: 

A hallucination refers to any description that is inconsistent with the image. This includes: 

• Mentioning objects not present in the image 

• Incorrect object counts 

• Incorrect attributes (color, size, shape) 

• Incorrect spatial relationships 

• Unsupported actions or interactions 

Evaluation Criteria 

1. Accuracy: Evaluate how factually correct the description is with respect to the image. Descriptions that contain hallucinations or incorrect attributes should receive lower scores. 2. Detailedness: Evaluate whether the description provides meaningful and useful visual details about the scene. Valid details include correct objects, attributes, actions, and spatial relationships that are clearly supported by the image. Hallucinated information must NOT be counted as valid detail. 

Scoring Rules 

• Assign a score from 0 to 10 for each assistant for both criteria. 

• Higher scores indicate better performance. 

• Accuracy should take priority over detailedness. 

• Do not reward verbosity unless the content is correct and supported by the image. 

• Evaluate each assistant independently based on the same standards. 

Input Format 

You will be given an image and three candidate responses. [Assistant 1] {Response of Assistant 1} [End of Assistant 1] [Assistant 2] {Response of Assistant 2} [End of Assistant 2] [Assistant 3] {Response of Assistant 3} [End of Assistant 3] 

Output Format 

Accuracy: ⟨score 1 score 2 score 3⟩

Reason: explanation of accuracy evaluation Detailedness: ⟨score 1 score 2 score 3⟩

Reason: explanation of detailedness evaluation SAGE 19 Describe the image in detail.            

> o = 0.63
> A bottle of wine and
> a glass of red wine
> sit on a glass table -
> next to a plate of
> cheese and grapes. o > 𝝉
> Reinforce Attention
> Describe the image in detail.
> o = 0.37
> A cat is resting on
> a brown leather
> couch but it is
> wearing
> a small red hat.
> A tabby cat is
> resting on a
> brown leather
> couch but it is
> lying next to two
> remote controls.
> o < 𝝉
> Diffuse Attention
> A bottle of wine and
> a glass of red wine
> sit on a glass table –
> with their reflection
> on the table.

Fig. 5: Qualitative results of SAGE, including sink-token spatial attention, GradCAM-derived visual grounding maps, the computed overlap score o, and the modulated spatial attention maps. The sink token is highlighted in red. 

8.7 Runtime Analysis 

Since SAGE operates during inference, it introduces additional computation for grounding verification and attention modulation. The overhead arises from three components: 

– extracting key concepts from the partially generated sequence, 

– computing Grad-CAM attribution from the vision encoder, and 

– measuring spatial agreement between attention maps and attribution maps. Importantly, these operations are triggered only when sink tokens are generated rather than at every decoding step, making the additional computation sparse. All runtime measurements are conducted on a single NVIDIA A100 GPU with batch size 1. Let T denote the sequence length and k the number of sink tokens encoun-tered during decoding ( k ≪ T in practice). While standard autoregressive de-coding has complexity O(T ), SAGE introduces an additional cost proportional to O(k), keeping the overall complexity close to standard decoding. Among the added components, Grad-CAM computation accounts for most of the overhead, whereas concept extraction, spatial overlap computation, and attention modula-tion incur negligible cost. As observed from Table 7, we observe only an average 10.8% increase in total decoding time while achieving substantial reductions in hallucination. 20 T. Shukla and Z. Kira 

Table 7: Average runtime overhead introduced by different components of SAGE. Grad-CAM computation dominates the additional cost, while concept extraction and attention modulation incur negligible overhead.             

> Component Avg. Additional Cost (%) Description
> Concept Extraction (POS Tagging) 1.2 Extract key concepts from decoded text Attention Map Extraction + IoU 1.7 Compute spatial overlap between maps Grad-CAM Attribution 7.6 Compute visual attribution from vision encoder Attention Modulation 0.3 Rescale attention weights
> Total SAGE Overhead 10.8 Relative to standard decoding

8.8 Additional Qualitative Results 

Figures 5 and 6 present qualitative results illustrating the behavior of SAGE dur-ing generation. Figure 5 visualizes spatial self-attention maps, Grad-CAM-based feature maps, and their corresponding overlap scores at sink-token checkpoints. We additionally show the modulated attention maps produced by SAGE together with the corrected generations. Figure 6 compares the outputs of LLaVA-1.5-7B [26] with and without SAGE. The examples demonstrate that SAGE can effectively detect grounding incon-sistencies and suppress hallucinated concepts during decoding, resulting in more visually grounded descriptions. 

8.9 Limitations 

While SAGE effectively reduces hallucinations in generative settings such as image captioning and open-ended visual description, it has several limitations. First, the method relies on the occurrence of sink tokens during autoregressive generation to trigger grounding checks. Consequently, it is less applicable to discriminative VLM tasks (e.g., visual question answering with short answers, classification, or multiple-choice reasoning) where outputs are typically short and may not contain such structural tokens. Second, the reliability signal depends on the agreement between self-attention and gradient-based attribution; when both signals are simultaneously misaligned or noisy, the modulation mechanism may fail to correct hallucinations. Third, computing gradient-based attribution introduces additional runtime overhead, particularly for long sequences or mod-els with large vision encoders. Finally, SAGE assumes that semantic concepts can be reliably extracted from the partially generated text, which may be chal-lenging when the generated sequence contains ambiguous or abstract phrases. Addressing these limitations and extending grounded decoding to short-form and discriminative settings remains an important direction for future work. SAGE 21 What can you see in this image? 

A street scene with a large clock on a 

pole in the foreground, but the street 

is bustling with people on bicycles 

and a red tram is approaching in the 

distance. 

> Introduce about this image.

LLaVA -1.5 

A street scene with a large clock on a 

pole in the foreground, but in the 

background, there are cars on the 

road and trees lining the quiet street. 

LLaVA -1.5 with SAGE 

A one -year -old baby with red 

hair and frosting on his face is sitting 

in front of a two -tiered birthday cake ,

and he is wearing a tiny blue party hat 

that matches the cake. 

LLaVA -1.5 

A one -year -old baby with red hair and 

frosting on his face is sitting in front 

of a two -tiered birthday cake , and 

he is wearing a brown and white 

polka -dot tie. 

LLaVA -1.5 with SAGE 

> What can you see in this image?

A beautiful red rose stands in a white 

vase next to a bowl of fresh apples on 

a windowsill . Through the window, 

you can see a green garden with a 

person walking their dog. 

> Introduce about this image.

LLaVA -1.5 

A beautiful red rose stands in a white 

vase next to a bowl of fresh apples on 

a windowsill . A wooden -framed 

mirror on the right reflects the fruit, 

and a brick wall is visible through the 

window .

LLaVA -1.5 with SAGE 

A delicious -looking stir -fry with 

chicken and mixed vegetables is 

served with a side of white rice on a 

patterned plate , yet a pair of wooden 

chopsticks are placed neatly beside 

the bowl. 

LLaVA -1.5 

A delicious -looking stir -fry with 

chicken and mixed vegetables is 

served with a side of white rice on a 

patterned plate, yet a fork and spoon 

are resting on the plate, ready for the 

meal. 

LLaVA -1.5 with SAGE 

Fig. 6: SAGE’s performance on mitigating hallucinations of LLaVA-1.5. 22 T. Shukla and Z. Kira 

## References 

1. Barbero, F., Álvaro Arroyo, Gu, X., Perivolaropoulos, C., Bronstein, M., Veličković, P., Pascanu, R.: Why do llms attend to the first token? (2025), https://arxiv. org/abs/2504.02732 

2. Chauhan, S., Chaudhary, M., Choy, K., Nellessen, S., Schoots, N.: Punctuation and predicates in language models (2025), https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.14067 

3. Chen, C., Liu, M., Jing, C., Zhou, Y., Rao, F., Chen, H., Zhang, B., Shen, C.: Per-turbollava: Reducing multimodal hallucinations with perturbative visual training (2025), https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.06486 

4. Chen, K., Zhang, Z., Zeng, W., Zhang, R., Zhu, F., Zhao, R.: Shikra: Unleash-ing multimodal llm’s referential dialogue magic (2023), https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2306.15195 

5. Chen, S., Zhu, T., Zhou, R., Zhang, J., Gao, S., Niebles, J.C., Geva, M., He, J., Wu, J., Li, M.: Why is spatial reasoning hard for vlms? an attention mechanism perspective on focus areas (2025), https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.01773 

6. Chen, T., Kornblith, S., Norouzi, M., Hinton, G.: A simple framework for con-trastive learning of visual representations (2020), https://arxiv.org/abs/2002. 05709 

7. Chen, Z., Zhao, Z., Luo, H., Yao, H., Li, B., Zhou, J.: Halc: Object hallucination reduction via adaptive focal-contrast decoding (2024), https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2403.00425 

8. Dai, W., Li, J., Li, D., Tiong, A.M.H., Zhao, J., Wang, W., Li, B., Fung, P., Hoi, S.: Instructblip: Towards general-purpose vision-language models with instruction tuning (2023), https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.06500 

9. Darcet, T., Oquab, M., Mairal, J., Bojanowski, P.: Vision transformers need reg-isters (2024), https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.16588 

10. Fang, H., Zhou, C., Kong, J., Gao, K., Chen, B., Xia, S.T.: Grounding language with vision: A conditional mutual information calibrated decoding strategy for reducing hallucinations in lvlms (2025), https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.19678 

11. Fang, Y., Wang, W., Xie, B., Sun, Q., Wu, L., Wang, X., Huang, T., Wang, X., Cao, Y.: Eva: Exploring the limits of masked visual representation learning at scale (2022), https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.07636 

12. Ferrando, J., Voita, E.: Information flow routes: Automatically interpreting lan-guage models at scale (2024), https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.00824 

13. Gemini Team: A new era of intelligence with gemini 3. https://blog.google/ products/gemini/gemini-3/ (Nov 2025), accessed: 2026-02-28 14. Guo, D., Zhu, Q., Yang, D., Xie, Z., Dong, K., Zhang, W., Chen, G., Bi, X., Wu, Y., Li, Y.K., Luo, F., Xiong, Y., Liang, W.: Deepseek-coder: When the large language model meets programming – the rise of code intelligence (2024), https: //arxiv.org/abs/2401.14196 

15. Huang, Q., Dong, X., Zhang, P., Wang, B., He, C., Wang, J., Lin, D., Zhang, W., Yu, N.: Opera: Alleviating hallucination in multi-modal large language models via over-trust penalty and retrospection-allocation (2024), https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2311.17911 

16. Jiang, C., Xu, H., Dong, M., Chen, J., Ye, W., Yan, M., Ye, Q., Zhang, J., Huang, F., Zhang, S.: Hallucination augmented contrastive learning for multimodal large language model (2024), https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.06968 

17. Jiang, Z., Chen, J., Zhu, B., Luo, T., Shen, Y., Yang, X.: Devils in middle lay-ers of large vision-language models: Interpreting, detecting and mitigating object hallucinations via attention lens (2025), https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.16724 SAGE 23 18. Kang, S., Kim, J., Kim, J., Hwang, S.J.: See what you are told: Visual attention sink in large multimodal models (2025), https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.03321 

19. Leng, S., Zhang, H., Chen, G., Li, X., Lu, S., Miao, C., Bing, L.: Mitigating object hallucinations in large vision-language models through visual contrastive decoding (2023), https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.16922 

20. Li, J., Zhang, J., Jie, Z., Ma, L., Li, G.: Mitigating hallucination for large vision language model by inter-modality correlation calibration decoding (2025), https: //arxiv.org/abs/2501.01926 

21. Li, J., Pan, K., Ge, Z., Gao, M., Ji, W., Zhang, W., Chua, T.S., Tang, S., Zhang, H., Zhuang, Y.: Fine-tuning multimodal llms to follow zero-shot demonstrative instructions (2024), https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.04152 

22. Li, J., Li, D., Savarese, S., Hoi, S.: Blip-2: Bootstrapping language-image pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language models (2023), https: //arxiv.org/abs/2301.12597 

23. Lin, T.Y., Maire, M., Belongie, S., Bourdev, L., Girshick, R., Hays, J., Perona, P., Ramanan, D., Zitnick, C.L., Dollár, P.: Microsoft coco: Common objects in context (2015), https://arxiv.org/abs/1405.0312 

24. Liu, F., Lin, K., Li, L., Wang, J., Yacoob, Y., Wang, L.: Mitigating hallucination in large multi-modal models via robust instruction tuning (2024), https://arxiv. org/abs/2306.14565 

25. Liu, H., Xue, W., Chen, Y., Chen, D., Zhao, X., Wang, K., Hou, L., Li, R., Peng, W.: A survey on hallucination in large vision-language models (2024), https: //arxiv.org/abs/2402.00253 

26. Liu, H., Li, C., Li, Y., Lee, Y.J.: Improved baselines with visual instruction tuning (2024), https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.03744 

27. Liu, H., Li, C., Wu, Q., Lee, Y.J.: Visual instruction tuning (2023), https:// arxiv.org/abs/2304.08485 

28. Liu, S., Zheng, K., Chen, W.: Paying more attention to image: A training-free method for alleviating hallucination in lvlms (2024), https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2407.21771 

29. Mao, S., Zhang, C., Cai, W.: Through the magnifying glass: Adaptive perception magnification for hallucination-free vlm decoding (2025), https://arxiv.org/ abs/2503.10183 

30. Montani, I., Honnibal, M., Honnibal, M., Boyd, A., Landeghem, S.V., Peters, H.: explosion/spacy: v3.7.2: Fixes for apis and requirements (Oct 2023), https://doi. org/10.5281/zenodo.10009823 

31. Park, D., Qian, Z., Han, G., Lim, S.N.: Mitigating dialogue hallucination for large vision language models via adversarial instruction tuning (2024), https://arxiv. org/abs/2403.10492 

32. Pi, R., Han, T., Xiong, W., Zhang, J., Liu, R., Pan, R., Zhang, T.: Strengthen-ing multimodal large language model with bootstrapped preference optimization (2024), https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.08730 

33. Qi, Z., Shang, C., Spiliopoulou, E., Pappas, N.: Capturing gaze shifts for guidance: Cross-modal fusion enhancement for vlm hallucination mitigation (2025), https: //arxiv.org/abs/2510.22067 

34. Radford, A., Kim, J.W., Hallacy, C., Ramesh, A., Goh, G., Agarwal, S., Sastry, G., Askell, A., Mishkin, P., Clark, J., Krueger, G., Sutskever, I.: Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision (2021), https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2103.00020 

35. Rohrbach, A., Hendricks, L.A., Burns, K., Darrell, T., Saenko, K.: Object halluci-nation in image captioning (2019), https://arxiv.org/abs/1809.02156 24 T. Shukla and Z. Kira 36. Selvaraju, R.R., Cogswell, M., Das, A., Vedantam, R., Parikh, D., Batra, D.: Grad-cam: Visual explanations from deep networks via gradient-based localiza-tion. International Journal of Computer Vision 128 (2), 336–359 (Oct 2019). 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s11263-019-01228-7 , http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/ s11263-019-01228-7 

37. Sun, M., Chen, X., Kolter, J.Z., Liu, Z.: Massive activations in large language models (2024), https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.17762 

38. Tang, F., Liu, C., Xu, Z., Hu, M., Peng, Z., Yang, Z., Su, J., Lin, M., Peng, Y., Cheng, X., Razzak, I., Ge, Z.: Seeing far and clearly: Mitigating hallucinations in mllms with attention causal decoding (2025), https://arxiv.org/abs/2505. 16652 

39. Touvron, H., Lavril, T., Izacard, G., Martinet, X., Lachaux, M.A., Lacroix, T., Rozière, B., Goyal, N., Hambro, E., Azhar, F., Rodriguez, A., Joulin, A., Grave, E., Lample, G.: Llama: Open and efficient foundation language models (2023), 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.13971 

40. Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A.N., Kaiser, L., Polosukhin, I.: Attention is all you need (2023), https://arxiv.org/abs/1706. 03762 

41. Wang, C., Yang, J., Zhou, Y.: Mint: Mitigating hallucinations in large vision-language models via token reduction (2025), https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.00717 

42. Wang, C., Chen, X., Zhang, N., Tian, B., Xu, H., Deng, S., Chen, H.: Mllm can see? dynamic correction decoding for hallucination mitigation (2025), https:// arxiv.org/abs/2410.11779 

43. Wang, J., Wang, Y., Xu, G., Zhang, J., Gu, Y., Jia, H., Wang, J., Xu, H., Yan, M., Zhang, J., Sang, J.: Amber: An llm-free multi-dimensional benchmark for mllms hallucination evaluation (2024), https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.07397 

44. Wang, P., Bai, S., Tan, S., Wang, S., Fan, Z., Bai, J., Chen, K., Liu, X., Wang, J., Ge, W., Fan, Y., Dang, K., Du, M., Ren, X., Men, R., Liu, D., Zhou, C., Zhou, J., Lin, J.: Qwen2-vl: Enhancing vision-language model’s perception of the world at any resolution (2024), https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.12191 

45. Wei, J., Zhang, X.: Dopra: Decoding over-accumulation penalization and re-allocation in specific weighting layer. In: Proceedings of the 32nd ACM Inter-national Conference on Multimedia. p. 7065–7074. MM ’24, ACM (Oct 2024). 

https://doi.org/10.1145/3664647.3681076 , http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/ 3664647.3681076 

46. Wu, J., Liu, Z., He, H.: Mitigating hallucinations in multimodal spatial relations through constraint-aware prompting (2025), https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.08317 

47. Xiao, G., Tian, Y., Chen, B., Han, S., Lewis, M.: Efficient streaming language models with attention sinks (2024), https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.17453 

48. Yin, H., Si, G., Wang, Z.: Clearsight: Visual signal enhancement for object hallu-cination mitigation in multimodal large language models (2025), https://arxiv. org/abs/2503.13107 

49. Yin, S., Fu, C., Zhao, S., Xu, T., Wang, H., Sui, D., Shen, Y., Li, K., Sun, X., Chen, E.: Woodpecker: hallucination correction for multimodal large language models. Science China Information Sciences 67 (12) (Dec 2024). https://doi.org/10. 1007/s11432-024-4251-x , http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11432-024-4251-x 

50. Yu, R., Yu, W., Wang, X.: Attention prompting on image for large vision-language models (2024), https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.17143 

51. Yu, Z., Wang, Z., Fu, Y., Shi, H., Shaikh, K., Lin, Y.C.: Unveiling and harnessing hidden attention sinks: Enhancing large language models without training through attention calibration (2024), https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.15765 SAGE 25 52. Zhang, J., Khayatkhoei, M., Chhikara, P., Ilievski, F.: Mllms know where to look: Training-free perception of small visual details with multimodal llms (2025), 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.17422 

53. Zhang, X., Quan, Y., Gu, C., Shen, C., Yuan, X., Yan, S., Cheng, H., Wu, K., Ye, J.: Seeing clearly by layer two: Enhancing attention heads to alleviate hallucination in lvlms (2024), https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.09968 

54. Zhang, X., Quan, Y., Shen, C., Yuan, X., Yan, S., Xie, L., Wang, W., Gu, C., Tang, H., Ye, J.: From redundancy to relevance: Information flow in lvlms across reasoning tasks (2024), https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.06579 

55. Zhang, X., Zhu, Y., Gu, C., Yuan, X., Zhao, Q., Cao, J., Tang, F., Fan, S., Shen, Y., Shen, C., Tang, H.: Hallucination begins where saliency drops. In: The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations (2026), 

https://openreview.net/forum?id=sjnErRHXf3 

56. Zhang, Y., Shi, Y., Yu, W., Wen, Q., Wang, X., Yang, W., Zhang, Z., Wang, L., Jin, R.: Debiasing multimodal large language models via penalization of language priors (2025), https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.05262 

57. Zhao, H., Si, S., Chen, L., Zhang, Y., Sun, M., Zhang, M., Chang, B.: Looking beyond text: Reducing language bias in large vision-language models via multi-modal dual-attention and soft-image guidance (2024), https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2411.14279 

58. Zhao, Z., Wang, B., Ouyang, L., Dong, X., Wang, J., He, C.: Beyond hallucina-tions: Enhancing lvlms through hallucination-aware direct preference optimization (2024), https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.16839 

59. Zheng, L., Chiang, W.L., Sheng, Y., Zhuang, S., Wu, Z., Zhuang, Y., Lin, Z., Li, Z., Li, D., Xing, E.P., Zhang, H., Gonzalez, J.E., Stoica, I.: Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena (2023), https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.05685 

60. Zhu, D., Chen, J., Shen, X., Li, X., Elhoseiny, M.: Minigpt-4: Enhancing vision-language understanding with advanced large language models (2023), https:// arxiv.org/abs/2304.10592 

61. Zhu, L., Ji, D., Chen, T., Xu, P., Ye, J., Liu, J.: Ibd: Alleviating hallucinations in large vision-language models via image-biased decoding (2024), https://arxiv. org/abs/2402.18476 

62. Zhu, Y., Tao, L., Dong, M., Xu, C.: Mitigating object hallucinations in large vision-language models via attention calibration (2025), https://arxiv.org/abs/2502. 01969