Title: Differentiable Normative Guidance for Nash Bargaining Solution Recovery

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.29297v1

Published Time: Wed, 01 Apr 2026 00:39:00 GMT

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
# Differentiable Normative Guidance for Nash Bargaining Solution Recovery 

Moirangthem Tiken Singh a, ∗, Surajit Borkotokey a, Rajnish Kumar b

> aDibrugarh University, Dibrugarh, Assam, India
> bQueen’s University, Belfast, United Kingdom

Abstract 

Autonomous artificial intelligence agents in negotiation systems must generate equitable utility alloca-tions satisfying individual rationality (IR), ensuring each agent receives at least its outside option, and the Nash Bargaining Solution (NBS), which maximizes joint surplus. Existing generative models often learn suboptimal human behaviors, producing solutions far from Pareto efficiency, while classical methods require full Pareto frontier knowledge, which is unavailable in real datasets. We propose a guided graph diffusion framework that generates individually rational utility vectors while approximating the NBS without frontier knowledge at inference time. Negotiations are modeled as directed graphs with graph attention capturing asymmetric agent attributes, and a conditional diffusion model maps these to utility vectors. A differentiable composite guidance loss, applied in the final reverse diffusion steps, penalizes IR violations and Nash product gaps. We prove that, under sufficient penalty weighting, solutions enter the IR region in finite time. Across datasets, the method achieves 100% IR compliance. Nash efficiency reaches 99.45% on synthetic data (within 0.55 percentage points of an oracle), and 54.24% (CaSiNo) and 88.67% (Deal or No Deal), improving 20–60 percentage points over unconstrained generative baselines. 

Keywords: Automated negotiation, Cooperative game theory, Nash Bargaining Solution, Diffusion models, Graph attention networks, Normative guidance 

1. Introduction 

Autonomous artificial intelligence (AI) agents agents are increasingly being deployed as intermediaries in high-stakes resource allocation processes, including supply chain contracting, spectrum allocation in wireless networks, legal dispute resolution, and international diplomatic coordination [1, 2]. In each of these domains, the agent is tasked with proposing a division of utility that multiple stakeholders may either accept or re-ject. The primary challenge in such applications is not solely computational tractability, given the maturity of solvers for constrained optimization problems, but rather the achievement of normative trustworthiness. Specifically, the system must generate outcomes that are simultaneously individually rational (no partic-ipant receives less than their outside option), Pareto efficient (no feasible reallocation can make at least one participant better off without making another worse off), and consistent with well justified axiomatic fairness criteria. Absent these formal guarantees, such systems cannot be considered suitable for responsible deployment in high-stakes environments, irrespective of their average performance on held out evaluation data. To satisfy these stringent requirements, cooperative game theory offers a precise normative benchmark. The seminal contribution of [3] established that four axioms, namely Pareto efficiency, symmetry, scale invariance, and independence of irrelevant alternatives, uniquely characterize NBS. This solution maximizes the product of the agents’ surplus utilities above their respective disagreement points. It implicitly incorporates individual rationality as a necessary condition and selects the particular Pareto efficient allocation that optimally trades off joint gains. Subsequent work [4] showed that the behavior of rational, strategically interacting agents in an alternating offers bargaining game converges to this solution      

> ∗Corresponding author
> Email addresses: tiken.m@dibru.ac.in (Moirangthem Tiken Singh), sborkotokey@dibru.ac.in (Surajit Borkotokey),
> rajnish.kumar@qub.ac.uk (Rajnish Kumar)
> arXiv:2603.29297v1 [cs.GT] 31 Mar 2026

in the limit as their discount factors approach one, thereby grounding the concept in both axiomatic and noncooperative foundations. Thus, satisfaction of individual rationality together with consistency with NBS forms the core set of requirements for a trustworthy autonomous negotiating agent. Despite the conceptual precision of this theoretical objective, the dominant methodological paradigm in contemporary artificial intelligence (AI) negotiation research is structurally misaligned with these game-theoretic guarantees. Prevailing approaches predominantly rely on training models directly on corpora of human negotiation dialogues. However, human negotiators exhibit bounded rationality [5]: they system-atically anchor on initial offers [6], display loss-averse preferences under uncertainty [7], and frequently terminate interactions by accepting early agreements rather than continuing to explore potentially more favorable negotiated outcomes. These behavioral regularities induce empirical utility allocations that are heavily concentrated at interior point outcomes, substantially below the Pareto frontier. When supervised or generative models are trained to approximate these empirical distributions via divergence minimization, they internalize and reproduce the suboptimality, power asymmetries, and cognitive biases embedded in the training data [8, 9]. Prior work further demonstrates that systems explicitly engineered with fairness oriented objectives can nonetheless reinstantiate demographic disparities when assessed in ecologically valid settings [10]. The empirical implications are pronounced. On standard human negotiation corpora such as CaSiNo [11], widely used generative baselines fail almost entirely to optimize for joint surplus, attaining near zero efficiency. This failure arises not from insufficient representational capacity of the underlying architectures, but from their faithful reproduction of a training distribution that is systematically displaced from the theoretical optimum. Two fundamental structural limitations underlie this failure in current generative models. First, they do not satisfy game theoretic axioms by design. Post hoc projection of an already biased generative sample onto an axiomatic solution set is inadequate. When the initial sample is concentrated in the vicinity of the disagreement point, a purely radial projection to the Pareto frontier cannot recover the directional information necessary to identify the surplus maximizing allocation. Achieving axiomatic compliance instead requires an iterative guidance mechanism integrated into the generative process itself, such that the sampling trajectory is actively steered toward axiom consistent regions of the outcome space. Second, dominant architectures represent negotiation states as flat vectors. This encoding obscures inter agent relational asymmetries, violates permutation invariance, and impedes rigorous counterfactual analysis [12]. To address these specific limitations, this work introduces a guided graph diffusion framework for equitable utility generation. The architecture integrates three principal components designed to mitigate empirical bias. First, a strategic graph encoder represents the negotiation as a directed graph, which is processed by a graph attention network [13] to produce a relational context embedding. This embedding captures asymmetric agent attributes (disagreement points, budgets, priority weights) while preserving permutation invariance at the graph level. Second, a conditional diffusion process employs this embedding to condition a denoising network that generates joint utility vectors [14]. Third, a normative guidance mechanism introduces a differentiable composite loss function that simultaneously penalizes Nash product shortfalls, violations of individual rationality, and deviations from the Pareto frontier. To enhance training stability, this gradient based correction is applied only during the final portion of the reverse diffusion process. This late activation schedule enables the generative model to first learn a coarse structure that is proximate to the Pareto set before enforcing fine grained, directionally informed optimization. The proposed framework is assessed on three datasets that jointly span a spectrum from analytical tractability to empirical complexity: a synthetic corpus for which optimal solutions are exactly computable, the CaSiNo human negotiation corpus [11], and the Deal or No Deal corpus [15]. Across all evaluated domains, the guided model is mathematically designed to strongly enforce individual rationality constraints, with theoretical backing under defined conditions. In addition, it attains near oracle Nash efficiency on the synthetic benchmark and substantially outperforms the strongest unconstrained generative baselines on human negotiation datasets, yielding large absolute gains in performance without requiring access to the exact Pareto frontier geometry at inference time. This work offers the following key contributions: 1. Guided Graph Diffusion for Utility Generation: A generative architecture coupling a relational graph encoder with a conditional diffusion process and a differentiable guidance loss. The system produces 2utility allocations that satisfy individual rationality by construction and align closely with optimal bargaining solutions across both synthetic and empirical domains. 2. Differentiable Normative Guidance Loss: The formulation of a three term composite guidance loss utilizing smooth penalties. This ensures everywhere nonzero gradients for constraint enforcement and surplus maximization within the reverse diffusion process, supported by formal convergence analysis establishing finite time entry into the feasible set. 3. Activation Window Guidance Mechanism: An empirically and theoretically validated design strategy that restricts normative guidance to the final fraction of reverse diffusion steps. Multidimensional sensitivity analysis confirms this window prevents early stage gradient over constraint and serves as the primary determinant of high generation efficiency. 4. Systematic Empirical Evaluation: A comprehensive benchmark across three datasets, six baseline methods, and four evaluation metrics. The results demonstrate that the proposed framework uniquely satisfies game theoretic axioms and escapes the distributional bias of human negotiation corpora with-out relying on post hoc mathematical solvers. Section 2 establishes the game theoretic foundations and surveys prior work in automated negotiation, generative modeling, and algorithmic fairness. Section 3 formalizes the proposed framework, including the graph encoding, diffusion process, guidance mechanism, and theoretical guarantees. Section 4 details the datasets, architectural configurations, and evaluation metrics. Section 5 presents the sensitivity analysis, axiomatic compliance results, latent trajectory dynamics, and baseline comparisons. Section 6 interprets the empirical findings and discusses systemic limitations. Finally, Section 7 summarizes the contributions and outlines directions for future research. 

2. Background and Problem Statement 

This section establishes the theoretical foundations on which the proposed framework rests and surveys the prior literature to formalize the computational problem. Cooperative game theory provides the normative reference point against which all prior computational approaches are measured. The formal goal of AI mediated negotiation is the construction of an equitable utility allocation across multiple agents in a non transferable utility environment. In these settings, agents cannot freely exchange utility and the feasible space of agreements is determined by the underlying resource structure. Any outcome a rational agent would accept must satisfy individual rationality, requiring that no agent receives less than their respective disagreement point or outside option [16]. An outcome failing this condition is voluntarily rejected. Individual rationality alone admits highly asymmetric allocations. NBS provides the unique Pareto efficient allocation that maximizes the Nash product [3, 4]. The work in [17] extended these foundational results to settings with incomplete information, establishing conditions under which this specific mathematical solution remains the appropriate fairness target even when agents possess private valuations. Translating these game theoretic guarantees into computational systems has produced distinct strate-gies over the past decades. The taxonomy provided in [18] distinguishes concession based approaches from utility maximizing approaches. The Automated Negotiating Agents Competition surveyed in [1] has yielded competitive agents for controlled multi-round settings. However, these classical agents share a structural dependency by assuming direct access to the opponent utility function or estimating it online through re-peated interaction. This dependency is incompatible with the single-shot generation setting considered in this work, where a utility allocation must be produced directly from agent feature representations. Further-more, classical solvers require explicit analytical knowledge of the Pareto frontier geometry to identify the optimum, which is unavailable for real world corpora like CaSiNo and Deal or No Deal. To overcome the frontier knowledge requirement inherent to classical solvers, models are increasingly trained directly on human dialogue corpora. The sequence to sequence architecture in [15] demonstrated that end-to-end agents can produce valid agreements. However, training on human data replicates subopti-mal empirical behaviors rather than optimizing joint utility. The work in [19] identified this distributional absorption problem and proposed decoupling strategy from language to reduce stylistic overfitting. This sep-aration does not resolve utility bias because the strategy module still learns from empirically flawed human negotiated outcomes. Reinforcement learning via reward signal fine tuning [20] can shift output distributions, 3but agents often adopt deceptive strategies when rewards do not strictly penalize individual rationality viola-tions [21]. Furthermore, supervised training on historically inequitable data amplifies pre existing disparities [8]. AI agents trained on historical bargaining records reproduce documented demographic disparities in final outcomes [9], and systems with explicit fairness objectives still reinstantiate these disparities in ecologically valid settings [10]. As alternatives to direct regression, generative models learn a distribution over outputs. Conditional Variational Autoencoders [22] encode the target output as a latent variable conditioned on an input con-text. The evidence lower bound objective provides only a lower bound on the true log likelihood, and the approximation gap widens in high variance settings. Conditional Generative Adversarial Networks [23] learn conditional distributions through adversarial training but are subject to mode collapse and training instability. Neither architecture provides mechanisms to enforce axiomatic constraints on generated outputs, as their respective reconstruction and adversarial objectives are mathematically agnostic to game theoretic compliance. Addressing the instability of prior generative architectures, Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models [24] reformulate generative modeling as a learned reverse process that gradually denoises a noise initialized sample via a score matching objective. Denoising Diffusion Implicit Models [14] provide a deterministic non Markovian variant that achieves comparable sample quality with fewer inference steps. Steering diffusion samples toward desired properties during inference was introduced via classifier guidance [25] and later classifier free guidance [26]. These methods were developed exclusively for continuous perceptual attributes in image generation and do not provide mechanisms for enforcing combinatorial or game theoretic constraints. Diffusion models have been applied successfully to molecular structure [27], but they have not been adapted for game theoretic utility generation utilizing differentiable axiomatic guidance. The necessity of axiomatic guidance is further underscored by the limitations of standard algorithmic fairness frameworks. The machine learning fairness literature proposes distinct operationalizations of eq-uitable treatment. Individual fairness requires similar individuals to receive similar outcomes [28]. Group level criteria focus on error rate parity across demographic groups [29]. Counterfactual fairness requires outcome invariance under interventions on protected attributes [30]. These statistical and causal frame-works differ entirely from the axiomatic criterion grounded in cooperative game theory. An outcome can satisfy demographic parity while simultaneously violating individual rationality for a specific agent. Trust-worthy AI in high-stakes deployment contexts requires normative constraints that are formally specified and computationally enforced at inference time [2]. Consequently, the precise formulation of equitable utility vectors in AI mediated negotiation systems requires satisfying these strict game theoretic axioms in non transferable utility settings. The computational task is to generate an outcome that guarantees strict individual rationality, ensuring each agent achieves a payoff greater than or equal to their outside option, while simultaneously maximizing the product of the surplus gains achieved by all negotiating parties. The primary methodological challenge is executing this constrained generation without analytical access to the Pareto frontier geometry and without internalizing the suboptimal distributional biases present in historical training corpora. The system must produce these normatively compliant utility vectors in a single-shot inference process using only the asymmetric contextual features of the negotiating agents. Resolving this overarching problem requires a novel generative mechanism that decouples state representation from probability modeling and enforces mathematical axioms dynamically during generation. 

3. Methodology 

This section introduces a formal framework for the construction of equitable utility vectors, u ∈ Rn with 

n ≥ 2, in the context of AI-mediated negotiations. To attenuate biases embedded in historically supervised datasets, we recast the utility-generation problem as a guided stochastic process that is rigorously constrained by foundational axioms from game theory. The proposed architecture (Figure 1) consists of three components. First, each agent’s structured ne-gotiation state, comprising disagreement points di, resource constraints, and preference representations, is encoded as a directed graph with n nodes. A Graph Attention Network v2 (GATv2) [31] layer then pro-cesses this graph to generate a dense strategic embedding h ∈ Rdh that captures inter-agent asymmetries and relational dependencies. Second, a conditional multilayer perceptron (MLP) diffusion model generates 4Agent Features 

x1, x2 ∈ Rk

> negotiation attributes

GATv2 Layer  

> n-node graph
> Kheads

h ∈ Rdh

Noise uT ∼ N (0, I)

Sinusoidal Time Emb.   

> temb ∈Rdt
> cat

MLP Denoiser 

sθ (ut, t, h )    

> Linear (dz→dmlp →n)

Utility u0

Normative Guidance 

Lguide   

> Nash Barrier +Strict IR
> [ut∥temb ∥h]
> Rdz

Sample   

> ∇ˆu0Lguide
> ωj= 10000 −2j/D

Strategic Graph Encoding 

Conditional MLP Diffusion 

Figure 1: System architecture for equitable utility generation. Strategic Graph Encoding: Agent feature vectors x1, x2 ∈ Rk ,encoding negotiation attributes (disagreement points, resource constraints, preference weights), are processed by a Graph Attention Network v2 (GATv2) with K attention heads over an n-node directed graph, producing a shared context embedding 

h ∈ Rdh . Conditional Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) Diffusion: At each reverse diffusion step, h is concatenated with the noisy state ut ∈ Rn and sinusoidal time embedding temb ∈ Rdt (ωj = 10000 −2j/D ), forming a dz -dimensional input (dz = n + dt + dh) to the MLP denoiser sθ , which predicts noise ˆε. Normative Guidance: In the final tstart fraction of denoising steps, the gradient ∇ˆu0 Lguide steers ˆu0 toward Individual Rationality and NBS using the guidance loss. 

utility trajectories via denoising diffusion implicit model (DDIM) [32] inference, conditioned on both h and a sinusoidal time embedding. Finally, a normative guidance mechanism applies step-wise, gradient-based corrections to the clean utility estimate ˆu0 during the final tstart fraction of denoising steps. Table 1 provides an overview of the principal mathematical notation employed throughout this formula-tion, together with a description of their respective conceptual roles within the model. 

3.1. Strategic Graph Encoding 

Conventional flat vectorial representations obscure relational asymmetries and fail to respect permutation invariance. To overcome these limitations, we model the negotiation state as a directed graph G = ( V, E )

with |V | = n nodes (representing the bilateral case when n = 2 , with a straightforward generalization to multilateral scenarios). Each node i ∈ V is associated with a k-dimensional strategic feature vector xi ∈ Rk.This vector encodes domain-specific negotiation attributes, such as the disagreement point di (forming the vector d), resource constraints, and preference orientations. Directed edges represent the dyadic relational structure and constraints between agents. To extract a unified conditioning signal from this structure, we employ a GATv2 layer. Unlike standard graph convolutions, GATv2 uses a dynamic attention mechanism that weights the influence of agent j on agent i based on their joint strategic state. For each attention head, the unnormalised attention score is computed as: 

eij = a⊤ LeakyReLU( W [xi ∥ xj ]) (1) where W ∈ Rdh×2k and a ∈ Rdh are learnable parameters, and ∥ denotes concatenation. These scores are then normalised across the neighbourhood N (i) via a softmax function: 

αij = exp( eij )

X 

> ℓ∈N (i)

exp( eiℓ ) (2) 5Table 1: Mathematical notation and implementation parameters. 

Symbol Code Description Symbol Code Description 

n — Number of negotiating agents. 

r radius Pareto frontier radius. 

u — Joint utility allocation vec-tor. 

u∗ 

> NBS

— NBS. 

di — Disagreement point of agent 

i.

d — Vector of disagreement points. 

k feat_dim Agent feature dimension. K num_heads Number of GATv2 heads. 

dh embed_dim Graph embedding dimen-sion. 

h — Context embedding. 

T T Diffusion timesteps. S steps DDIM inference steps. 

βt — Noise variance at step t. ¯αt — Cumulative signal reten-tion. 

dt time_dim Time embedding dimension. dz — Denoiser input dimension. 

dmlp hidden MLP hidden width. cout scale_out Output scaling factor. 

sθ — MLP denoiser. ˆε — Predicted noise. 

ˆu0 — Clean utility estimate. ˆuguided  

> 0

— Guided estimate. 

cmax clip_u0 Upper bound on ˆu0. cdrift clip_ut Clamp for latent drift. 

λ lambda_guide Guidance step size. tstart guide_start_frac Guidance start fraction. 

α alpha_norm Nash loss weight. β beta_ir IR penalty weight. 

γ gamma_frontier Frontier penalty weight. δ — IR margin constant. 

ϵ — Numerical stability con-stant. 

ΠF — Projection onto feasible set. 

The updated node representation for head m is obtained by aggregating the weighted features: 

h(m) 

> i

= σact 

 X 

> j∈N (i)

α(m) 

> ij

W(m)xj

 (3) where σact denotes a non-linear activation function. Using K parallel attention heads, the per-node outputs are concatenated and passed through a linear projection, followed by layer normalisation, to yield hi ∈ Rdh .Finally, a global mean-pooling readout produces the unified conditioning embedding: 

h = 1

|V |

X

> i∈V

hi ∈ Rdh (4) This formulation ensures that h is permutation-invariant while remaining sensitive to the asymmetric strate-gic constraints of the negotiating agents. This embedding is computed once per negotiation context and is held fixed, providing a stable geometric prior throughout all subsequent diffusion inference steps. 

3.2. Conditional MLP Diffusion Process 

Having distilled the structural asymmetries of the negotiation into the strategic context embedding h,we formulate the generative engine as a conditional Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Model (DDPM). The objective of this module is to synthesise a joint utility vector u0 ∈ Rn that represents an equitable n-party allocation. The formulation begins with the forward diffusion process. A clean utility sample u0 is progressively corrupted into isotropic Gaussian noise over T discrete timesteps via a predefined variance schedule {βt}Tt=1 :

q(ut | u0) = N  ut; √¯αt u0, (1 − ¯αt) I , ¯αt =

> t

Y

> s=1

(1 − βs) (5) This allows for the direct sampling of the noisy state at any arbitrary timestep t as ut = √¯αt u0 + √1 − ¯αt ε,where ε ∼ N (0, I), thereby bypassing sequential simulation. 6To invert this corruption, the reverse process is parameterised by a denoiser sθ (ut, t, h ) that predicts the injected noise ˆε. We adopt a Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) architecture for this task. At each inference step, the MLP receives a dz -dimensional input vector formed by concatenating the noisy utility state ut ∈ Rn, a sinusoidal time embedding temb ∈ Rdt , and the fixed graph context h ∈ Rdh :

z = [ ut ∥ temb ∥ h ] ∈ Rdz , dz = n + dt + dh (6) The sinusoidal embedding encodes the normalised timestep ˜t = t/T ∈ [0 , 1] using frequency components 

ωj = 10000 −2j/D for j = 0 , . . . , D/ 2 − 1, followed by a two-layer projection. The denoiser maps z to the predicted noise via a stack of fully-connected layers, interspersed with Layer Normalisation (LN) and SiLU activations: 

sθ : Rdz Linear 

−−−−−→ LN +SiLU 

−−−−−−−→ Linear 

−−−−−→ LN +SiLU 

−−−−−−−→ Linear 

−−−−−→ ˆε ∈ Rn (7) To ensure numerical stability, the final layer output is scaled by a small constant cout ≪ 1, which prevents the clean estimate ˆu0 from exploding at high noise levels where √¯αt ≈ 0.During inference, the model generates utility vectors using S deterministic DDIM steps. At each step, a clean utility estimate is first recovered from the noisy state: 

ˆu0 = clip 

 ut − √1 − ¯αt ˆε

√¯αt

, 0, c max 



(8) where cmax is an upper clamp bound that stabilises the estimate. Once recovered, ˆu0 is subjected to normative guidance (detailed in Section 3.3) to yield ˆuguided  

> 0

. The DDIM update then propagates this guided estimate to the subsequent step: 

ut−1 = √¯αt−1 ˆuguided  

> 0

+ p1 − ¯αt−1 ˆε (9) To prevent cumulative latent drift from compounding over multiple guided steps, the intermediate state is soft-clamped: ut−1 ← clip( ut−1, −cdrift , c drift ). At the terminal step, rather than returning the DDIM output (which collapses to ˆε when ¯αnext = 0 ), the model directly outputs the final guided estimate ˆuguided  

> 0

.

Training Objective.. Model optimisation proceeds in two phases. In Phase 1, the denoiser is trained using a standard denoising score-matching loss [24] to accurately predict the injected noise: 

LMSE = Et, u0, ε

h

ε − sθ

 √¯αt u0 + √1 − ¯αt ε, t, h  2i

(10) In Phase 2, a normative regulariser is added: L = LMSE + Lguide , where Lguide is applied to the clipped estimate ˆu0 and is formally defined in Section 3.3 (Eq. 11). 

3.3. Normative Guidance via Differentiable Nash Bargaining 

As established in Section 3.2, relying solely on standard score-matching risks replicating the historical biases embedded in the training data. To counteract this and steer the generative process toward equitable outcomes in Non-Transferable Utility (NTU) environments, we introduce a differentiable guidance loss, 

Lguide . This function serves a dual purpose: it acts as a normative regularizer during Phase 2 training and as a dynamic gradient guide during inference. To prevent premature constraint interference, this guidance is applied dynamically only during the final tstart fraction of reverse denoising steps (i.e., when t/T < t start ). Let di denote the disagreement point for agent i. The three-term guidance loss for the n-party case is formulated as: 

Lguide (u, d) = −α

> n

X

> i=1

log 



softplus( ui − di) + ϵ

| {z }  

> LN:Nash efficiency

+ β

> n

X

> i=1

softplus( di − ui + δ)

| {z } 

> LIR :strict IR

+ γ · softplus( ∥u∥2 − r2)

| {z }  

> LF:frontier adherence

(11) where softplus( x) = log(1 + ex) is utilized in place of hard maximum operators to ensure smooth, everywhere-nonzero gradients. Within this formulation, ϵ > 0 provides numerical stability; δ > 0 acts as a 7strictness margin to enforce ui ≥ di with a conservative buffer; and r > 0 defines the Pareto frontier radius, bounding the feasible set F = {u ≥ 0, ∥u∥ ≤ r}.At each guided inference step, the gradient g = ∇ˆu0 Lguide is computed via automatic differentiation. To scale the update proportionally to the current signal-to-noise ratio, we employ an adaptive step size 

w = λ√¯αt. This provides strong, necessary corrections at low noise levels while avoiding destabilizing interference when the noise variance is high. The guided utility estimate is computed as: 

ˆuguided  

> 0

= Π F



ˆu0 − w g 

∥g∥ + ϵ



(12) where ΠF is the Euclidean projection onto the feasible set, executed by first clamping negatives ( u ←

max( u, 0)) and subsequently projecting onto the radius ( u ← u · r/ max( ∥u∥, r )). Gradient normalisation is applied prior to projection to prevent the three disparate terms in Lguide from producing disproportionately large updates when the state operates far from the Pareto frontier. Crucially, the Softplus-based formulation is adopted over hard max(0 , ·) and log(max( ϵ, ·)) operators for two optimization-critical reasons. First, its derivative, ∂ softplus( x)/∂x = σ(x), is bounded within (0 , 1) for all x (where σ here denotes the standard logistic sigmoid), preventing gradient explosions when ˆu0 violates the Individual Rationality boundary by a large margin. Second, because the gradient remains nonzero everywhere, the guidance mechanism continues to provide a directional corrective signal even in deeply infeasible regions, whereas a hard maximum operator would produce a zero gradient and stall the recovery process. 

3.4. Theoretical Guarantees and Boundary Cases 

We establish the theoretical properties of the guided reverse diffusion process. Let d = [ d1, . . . , d n]⊤

denote the vector of disagreement points. The Individually Rational feasible region is F = {u ∈ Rn | ui ≥

di, ∀i}. The reverse-time probability flow ODE governing the guided trajectory is: 

dut =

h

f (ut, t ) − 12 g2(t)



∇u log pt(ut) − ∇ uLguide (ut)

i 

dt (13) We invoke the following standard assumptions: 

Assumption 3.1 (Manifold Geometry) . The diffusion model implicitly learns a data manifold M whose upper-right boundary constitutes a strictly concave, continuous Pareto frontier ∂M+.

Assumption 3.2 (Score Boundedness) . The unconditional score function ∇u log pt(ut) is L-Lipschitz con-tinuous and bounded: ∥∇ u log pt(ut)∥ ≤ M for some M > 0.

Assumption 3.3 (Nash Concavity) . The Nash product N (u) = Qni=1 (ui − di) is strictly log-concave over the convex set M ∩ F .

Assumptions 1 and 3 hold for divisible resources with a convex feasible set. For non-convex domains, the forward noising process acts as a Gaussian smoothing operator that mathematically induces a convex manifold Mθ at higher noise scales, allowing the reverse process to bypass local optima before annealing into the true frontier. 

Lemma 3.1 (Finite-Time Convergence to IR) . For any initial sample uT /∈ F , if the IR penalty weight satisfies β > M + sup u /∈F , t ∥f (u, t )∥, the guided trajectory enters F in finite time. Proof. Define the Lyapunov function V (u) = 12

Pni=1 

  max(0 , d i − ui)2. Outside F, the IR gradient of 

Lguide dominates the corrective update. Under the probability flow ODE (Eq. 13), because the penalty weight β strictly bounds both the maximal score magnitude M and the drift term f (u, t ), the guidance term dominates the trajectory: ∇uLguide ≈ − β P  

> {i:ui<d i}

ei. It follows that the continuous-time derivative satisfies ˙V (u) ≤ − cpV (u) for some constant c > 0. By Lyapunov’s direct method, the trajectory reaches 

V = 0 (and thus enters F) in finite time. 

Theorem 3.2 (Asymptotic Convergence to the NBS) . Given ut ∈ F , and assuming the learned score perfectly matches the true marginal score ( ∇u log pt(ut) = sθ (ut, t )), as the noise schedule g(t) → 0 and 

α → 1, the continuous-time dynamics converge to the unique NBS u∗ 

> NBS

∈ ∂M+.

8Proof. Inside the feasible region F, the IR penalty evaluates to zero, and the Nash term dominates the guidance gradient: ∇uLguide = −α∇u log N (u). Under the assumption of perfect score matching, the un-conditional score smoothly projects the state onto the tangent space of the data manifold M, while the guidance gradient pushes the state toward higher Nash product values along this manifold. By Assump-tions 1 and 3, maximizing a strictly log-concave function over a convex set yields a unique global maxi-mum. Therefore, as the noise variance collapses ( t → 0), the state converges deterministically: lim t→0 ut =arg max u∈∂M+∩F 

Qni=1 (ui − di) = u∗

> NBS

.The final utility ˆu approximates the NBS relative to the model’s learned distribution Mθ . In practice, the distance between the generated sample ˆu and the true u∗ 

> NBS

is bounded by the L2 score-matching error of the neural network, providing a stochastically smoothed approximation well-suited to noisy empirical datasets. 

3.5. Practical Inference and Counterfactual Evaluation 

At runtime, the utility generation process is initialised with pure Gaussian noise uT ∼ N (0, I). This noise is iteratively refined over S DDIM steps, conditioned on the graph embedding h and steered by ∇ˆu0 Lguide 

in the final tstart fraction of steps. The complete inference procedure is summarised in Algorithm 1. 

Algorithm 1 Guided DDIM Inference 

Require: Agent features x1, . . . , xn; disagreement vector d; parameters λ, tstart , α, β, γ, r; number of sampling steps S

Ensure: ˆu ∈ Rn (equitable utility allocation)  

> 1:

h ← GATv2 (x1, . . . , xn) ▷ Context embedding ∈ Rdh 

> 2:

uT ∼ N (0, I) 

> 3:

for i = 1 , . . . , S do  

> 4:

t ← timestep corresponding to step i 

> 5:

ˆε ← sθ (ut, t, h ) 

> 6:

ˆu0 ← clip 

 ut − √1 − ¯αt ˆε

√¯αt

, 0, c max 

 

> 7:

if t/T < t start then ▷ Guidance window  

> 8:

w ← λ√¯αt 

> 9:

g ← ∇ ˆu0 Lguide (ˆ u0, d) 

> 10:

ˆu0 ← ΠF (ˆ u0 − w g / (∥g∥ + ϵ))  

> 11:

end if  

> 12:

if i = S then  

> 13:

return ˆu0 ▷ Terminal step: return clean estimate directly  

> 14:

end if  

> 15:

ut−1 ← √¯αt−1 ˆu0 + √1 − ¯αt−1 ˆε 

> 16:

ut−1 ← clip( ut−1, −cdrift , c drift ) ▷ Prevent cumulative drift  

> 17:

end for 

Beyond generating a single outcome, the stochastic initialisation supports ensemble-based evaluation and diversity quantification by sampling multiple trajectories from the same context. Furthermore, the generative architecture naturally enables counterfactual fairness analysis: targeted interventions on the input features, such as equalising the disagreement points di of asymmetrically situated agents, allow quantitative evaluation of the equity impact of structural imbalances, without requiring access to counterfactual ground-truth outcomes. 

4. Experimental Setup 

To empirically validate the guided graph diffusion framework for multi-issue bilateral negotiations, the experimental pipeline is designed as a coherent, sequential workflow. It begins with carefully curated data infrastructure, proceeds through model architecture instantiation and phased training, incorporates sys-tematic hyperparameter optimization, and concludes with a multi-dimensional evaluation protocol. Every 9negotiation instance is normalized to a strictly bilateral continuous utility space u ∈ [0 , 1] 2, which enables consistent comparison between theoretically optimal bargaining outcomes and both synthetic baselines and human-generated behavior. 

4.1. Datasets 

The empirical foundation rests on three complementary datasets that together span analytical exactness and real-world complexity (see Table 2 for a summary of their structural properties and splits). The synthetic NTU dataset comprises 25 ,000 dyads featuring strictly concave Pareto frontiers and asymmetrically sampled disagreement points drawn from U(0 .05 , 0.4) . Because the disagreement points and frontier shapes are fully known, NBS can be computed numerically using Sequential Least Squares Programming (SLSQP) [33], providing an unambiguous analytical reference. To assess how well the model generalizes to human bargaining behavior, two established real-world corpora are included. The CaSiNo corpus captures human-to-human multi-issue negotiations over camp-site items (food, water, firewood) in which participants hold heterogeneous but publicly revealed prior-ity weights. The Deal-or-No-Deal corpus, by contrast, features hidden private valuations over splits of books, hats, and balls, introducing realistic information asymmetry. In both human datasets, utilities are normalized to the unit square and no-deal outcomes are excluded to focus on reached agreements. Across all three datasets, each agent is represented by the same compact 3-dimensional feature vector 

[di, normalized budget , priority weight ], ensuring architectural uniformity while respecting domain-specific preference structures.                                      

> Table 2: Dataset Infrastructure and Structural Properties
> Dataset Split Disagreement diFeat. dim kStructural Characteristics
> Synthetic NTU 20k / 2.5k / 2.5k U(0 .05 ,0.4) 325 ,000 dyads with strictly concave NTU Pareto frontiers; disagreement points sam-pled asymmetrically per agent; exact NBS computable via SLSQP. CaSiNo corpus [11] 80% / 10% / 10% −− 3Human-to-human multi-issue bargaining over campsite items (food, water, fire-wood) with varying priority weights; utili-ties normalized to [0 ,1] 2.Deal or No Deal [15] 80% / 10% / 10% −− 3Agent negotiations over item splits (books, hats, balls) with hidden private valuations; no-deal outcomes excluded.
> Feature vector xi∈Rk:[di,normalized budget ,priority weight ]for all three datasets.

4.2. Model Architecture and Training Configuration 

The model architecture strategically decouples relational context encoding from the generative denoising process. All fixed architectural choices and numerical bounds are reported in Table 3. A single GATv2 layer with four attention heads processes a directed two-node bargaining graph, after which global mean-pooling yields a fixed 64-dimensional context vector that conditions the entire reverse diffusion trajectory. Given the minimal structural complexity of bilateral negotiations, deep graph message passing provides limited benefit; therefore, the noise-prediction network sθ is implemented as a time-conditioned MLP. This MLP directly concatenates the noisy utility state ut ∈ R2, a 32-dimensional sinusoidal time embedding, and the pooled context vector into a 98-dimensional input, which is then processed through two hidden layers of width 256 using LayerNorm and SiLU activations. Training unfolds over 30 epochs in two distinct phases. During the first 15 epochs (Phase 1), the model learns the empirical data manifold via standard denoising score matching with a linear variance schedule (βt from 10 −4 to 0.02) over 1000 forward timesteps and AdamW optimization with cosine annealing. In the second phase (epochs 15–29), the normative guidance loss Lguide is gradually introduced. To avoid destabilization, the individual rationality penalty coefficient β is linearly annealed from 10 to 50, progressively strengthening adherence to game-theoretic axioms without overwhelming early training dynamics. 10 Table 3: Fixed architectural hyperparameters and numerical bounds. 

Parameter Value Parameter Value 

Architecture & Diffusion Schedule 

Agents ( n) 2 Total Timesteps ( T ) 1000 GATv2 Heads ( K) 4 DDIM Steps ( S) 50 Graph Emb. ( dh) 64 Initial Var. ( β1) 10 −4

Time Emb. ( dt) 32 Final Var. ( βT ) 0.02 MLP Width ( dmlp ) 256 Input Dim. ( dz ) 98 

Numerical Bounds & Training Configuration 

Clean Bound ( cmax ) 1.2 Stability Const. ( ϵ) 10 −6

Drift Clamp ( cdrift ) 1.5 IR Margin ( δ) 0.05 Output Scale ( cout ) 0.1 Pareto Radius ( r) 1.0 Batch Size 256 Total Epochs 30 Optimizer AdamW Phase 1 / Phase 2 15 / 15 epochs 

4.3. Hyperparameter Search 

Because the impact of classifier-free-style guidance is known to be highly sensitive to scale, timing, and relative weighting, a comprehensive multi-dimensional grid search was performed over the key normative guidance hyperparameters rather than adopting arbitrary fixed values. The complete search space, including guidance strength λ, activation timestep tstart , Nash-product multiplier α, IR penalty β, frontier penalty 

γ, and number of DDIM steps S, is detailed in Table 4. An extensive grid of configurations was evaluated on every test split using the full suite of metrics, and the best-performing parameter set for each dataset was selected via a composite objective that balances Nash efficiency, individual rationality compliance, and frontier proximity. 

> Table 4: Multidimensional Search Space for Normative Guidance Parameters

Parameter Symbol Search Domain Grid Steps 

Guidance step size λ [0 .005 , 0.35] 10 Guidance activation tstart [0 .10 , 0.70] 8Nash multiplier α [5 .0, 300 .0] 10 IR penalty β [0 .5, 50 .0] 10 Frontier penalty γ [0 .5, 80 .0] 10 DDIM inference steps S {10 , 15 , 25 , 50 } 4

4.4. Evaluation Metrics 

System performance is quantified through four complementary metrics that jointly probe normative validity, efficiency, and geometric fidelity. IR compliance measures the expected fraction of generated samples that strictly dominate the disagreement point for both agents simultaneously: IR Compliance = E[1[ui ≥ di ∀i]] 

The Nash product serves as the primary proxy for joint surplus and fairness, computed as E[Q

> i

(ui − di)] .Nash efficiency normalizes the achieved Nash product against the exact SLSQP-computed NBS of each test instance: Nash Efficiency = E[Generated Nash Product ]

E[NBS Nash Product ]

11 enabling fair cross-dataset comparison despite differing disagreement geometries. Finally, mean L2 frontier distance (DF ) quantifies geometric accuracy by measuring the average Euclidean projection distance from generated points to the theoretical Pareto frontier arc (independent of the Nash objective): 

DF = E



u − r u

∥u∥ 2



To assess the statistical significance of performance improvements attributable to normative guidance, Wilcoxon signed-rank tests are conducted on the per-instance Nash-product distributions derived from guided versus unguided models. This test constitutes a robust, non-parametric procedure that is well suited to the characteristically skewed distributions observed for optimal bargaining outcomes. Taken together, this experimental framework, grounded in the dataset specifications reported in Table 2, instantiated through the architectural and training configurations in Table 3, systematically tuned via the sensitivity analysis summarized in Table 4, and evaluated using a comprehensive and balanced suite of per-formance metrics—provides a methodologically rigorous framework for linking axiomatic bargaining theory and the generative capabilities of guided diffusion models in realistic, multi-issue negotiation environments. 

5. Results and Analysis 

The efficacy of the normatively guided graph diffusion framework is evaluated in three phases. First, the sensitivity of the guidance hyperparameters is analyzed to establish optimal configurations for each domain. Second, quantitative improvements in axiomatic compliance and joint surplus maximization achieved by the guided model over the unguided baseline are assessed. Finally, the latent trajectory dynamics are examined to understand how continuous gradient steering constrains the diffusion process to satisfy strict game-theoretic constraints. 

5.1. Sensitivity Analysis and Hyperparameter Optimization 

To ensure stable convergence of the guided diffusion chain while jointly enforcing IR and NBS alignment, a multidimensional sensitivity analysis was conducted across six guidance hyperparameters: the normalized step size λ, the guidance activation threshold tstart , the Nash multiplier α, the IR penalty β, the frontier penalty γ, and the number of DDIM inference steps S. The explicit correspondence between these mathe-matical symbols and the programmatic variable names displayed in the subsequent sensitivity visualizations is documented in Table 1. A formal sensitivity score was computed for each parameter, defined as the range of the evaluation metric divided by its mean, averaged across all four target metrics (IR Compliance ↑, Nash Product ↑, Nash Efficiency ↑, Frontier Distance ↓). As quantified in Figure 2 (left), tstart and λ emerge as the dominant parameters, yielding sensitivity scores of ≈0.80 and ≈0.70 respectively. Conversely, α exhibits the lowest sensitivity ( ≈0.15 ), indicating saturation within its tested range and implying that search effort should be concentrated on λ and tstart .The Spearman ρ matrix (Figure 2, right) clarifies the directionality of these effects. The λ row reveals the strongest signal: perfect monotone correlations with Nash Product and Nash Efficiency ( ρ = +1 .00 ), alongside a strong positive correlation with IR Compliance ( ρ = +0 .81 ), at a bounded cost to Frontier Distance ( ρ = −0.54 ). The tstart row exhibits strong negative correlations with Nash alignment ( ρ = −0.88 ), confirming that delaying activation substantially reduces the corrective steps available before the chain terminates. Together, these results establish a clear operational directive: guidance requires early activation and large step sizes to maximize normative compliance. Three secondary effects merit explicit note. First, β yields a counterintuitive negative correlation with IR Compliance ( ρ ≈ − 0.34 ): excessively large IR penalty magnitudes produce gradient norms that drive ˆu0

past the IR boundary into Nash-suboptimal territory. Second, α is near-zero across all metrics ( |ρ| ≤ 0.13 ), confirming saturation. Third, additional DDIM steps are negatively correlated with Nash alignment ( ρ =

−0.31 ), because more unguided early steps compound latent drift before ∇ˆu0 Lguide can intervene. To investigate the interaction between the two dominant parameters, a joint 8×8 grid search over 

(λ, t start ) was conducted (Figure 3). The IR Compliance panel reveals a broad high-performance region (≥0.98 ) in the upper-left quadrant, degrading monotonically toward the lower-right. Nash Product and Ef-ficiency show a sharper boundary: only a narrow corridor in the upper-left achieves high performance, with 12 Figure 2: Hyperparameter sensitivity profile for the Synthetic NTU dataset. Left: Spider chart ranking parameters by sensitivity score (range/mean averaged over four metrics), identifying tstart and λ as the dominant factors ( ≈0.80 and ≈0.70 

respectively), while α and γ are effectively saturated ( ≤0.20 ). Right: Spearman ρ matrix quantifying directionality. λ exhibits perfect monotone correlation with Nash Product ( ρ = +1 .00 ) and Nash Efficiency ( ρ = +1 .00 ), while tstart is strongly negatively correlated ( ρ = −0.88 ), confirming that earlier, stronger guidance is the primary driver of Nash-optimal allocation. The β row exhibits a counterintuitive negative correlation ( ρ ≈ − 0.34 with IR), attributable to gradient overshooting at excessive penalty magnitudes. Symbol–code name correspondence follows Table 1. 

Nash Efficiency ranging from 2.5% (small λ, late tstart ) to 20% (large λ, early tstart ). The base configuration (dashed box) sits at ≈10% efficiency — substantially below the achievable optimum. The Frontier Distance panel exhibits the inverse spatial pattern, exposing the fundamental trade-off: no single cell simultaneously dominates all four metrics, confirming the necessity of a composite objective. The optimal configurations derived from this composite objective are reported in Table 5. Because λ

exhibits a perfect monotone relationship with Nash optimization, the composite objective selects the upper bound of the search grid ( λ = 0 .35 ) across all three datasets, indicating that λ is a domain-invariant parameter. We note that performance did not saturate at this boundary, suggesting the true optimum may exceed 0.35 . Consistently fewer DDIM steps ( S = 10 –15 , versus the default S = 50 ) are selected, mitigating early-chain noise accumulation before guidance activates, consistent with ρ(S, Nash ) = −0.31 .

Table 5: Optimal Hyperparameter Configurations Derived via Sensitivity Analysis                                             

> Dataset λ(lambda_guide )tstart (guide_start_frac )S(steps )α(alpha_norm )β(beta_ir )γ(gamma_frontier )
> Synthetic NTU 0.35 0.25 15 10 .08.015 .0
> CaSiNo Corpus 0.35 0.40 10 150 .020 .010 .0
> Deal or No Deal 0.35 0.30 10 10 .00.510 .0
> All symbols defined in Table 1; search domains in Table 4. Values selected by composite objective: 0.40 ·IR + 0 .35 ·Efficiency + 0 .15 ·Nash + 0 .10 ·(1 −FDist ).

Domain-specific structural differences govern the remaining parameters. The selection of tstart (0.25 for Synthetic NTU versus 0.40 for CaSiNo) is structurally significant: empirical human corpora exhibit higher variance and produce less stable early estimates ˆu0, requiring delayed activation to avoid corrupting the latent trajectory before the signal is reliable. The large values of α (150 .0) and β (20 .0) selected for CaSiNo reflect a fundamental property of empirical negotiation data: human negotiators frequently accept interior-point outcomes far from the Pareto efficient, biasing the learned distribution toward suboptimal utility regions and demanding stronger normative correction. Conversely, the low β = 0 .5 for Deal-or-No-Deal is consistent 13 Figure 3: Joint 2-D grid search over λ (lambda_guide , y-axis) and tstart (guide_start_frac , x-axis) across four evaluation metrics (Synthetic NTU dataset). The dashed blue box marks the base configuration ( λ = 0 .03 , tstart = 0 .30 ); the solid box marks the composite-optimal configuration. Large λ combined with early activation maximizes Nash Product and IR Compliance but increases Frontier Distance; small λ with late activation preserves feasibility at the cost of Nash alignment, yielding efficiencies as low as 2.5% . No single cell dominates all four metrics simultaneously, confirming that a composite objective is required. 

with that dataset’s discrete item-allocation structure, where utility vectors are naturally bounded away from the disagreement boundary. 

5.2. Axiomatic Compliance and Efficiency Gains 

Using the optimized configurations from Table 5, the guided framework is benchmarked against an unguided DDIM baseline — identical architecture, identical training, guidance disabled at inference. Results are reported in Table 6 and spatial distributions are visualized in Figure 4. The spatial distributions in Figure 4(a) expose the limitations of the unguided baseline. In the Synthetic NTU domain, the unguided model exhibits higher variance, with samples crossing the IR boundary (black crosses), corresponding to the 6.1% IR violation rate in Table 6. In the human-centric datasets, the unguided model exhibits mode collapse toward the origin: because empirical training data reflects cautious, suboptimal human bargaining, the learned distribution concentrates near (0 , 0) . Although this conservative clustering avoids IR violations, it fails to optimize the negotiation — yielding 5.6% Nash Efficiency on CaSiNo. Integration of the differentiable guidance loss Lguide transforms the generative distribution. The guided allocations (green) repel from d, ensuring 1.000 IR Compliance across all datasets. The Nash gradient ( α

term) stretches the distribution toward the Pareto arc, escaping the biased empirical prior. This geomet-ric expansion is captured quantitatively in Table 6: Synthetic NTU efficiency rises from 24 .3% to 99 .4% ;14 Figure 4: Visual evaluation of generated utility allocations across the three negotiation domains under optimized guidance configurations (Table 5). Panel (a): Spatial distribution of generated utilities in [0 , 1] 2; the guided framework (green) actively repels from the disagreement points d (black crosses) while concentrating mass near the Pareto frontier arc. Panel (b): Nash product density; rightward shift indicates improved joint surplus and fairness. Panels (c) and (d): IR Compliance and Nash Efficiency distributions quantifying the reduction in axiomatic violations and recovery of operational optimality relative to the unguided baseline. 

15 Table 6: Quantitative Performance: Unguided vs. Guided DDIM                                                   

> Dataset Model IR Compliance ↑Nash Product ↑Nash Efficiency ↑Frontier Dist. ↓
> Synthetic NTU Unguided 0.9390 0.0567 24 .29% 0.0000
> Guided 1.0000 0.2323 99 .45 %0.0000
> CaSiNo Corpus Unguided 1.0000 0.0202 05 .64% 0.0000
> Guided 1.0000 0.2712 54 .24 %0.0000
> Deal or No Deal Unguided 1.0000 0.3374 67 .47% 0.0153
> Guided 1.0000 0.4434 88 .67 %0.0000
> Statistical significance (Wilcoxon signed-rank, Nash Product): Synthetic NTU p= 3 .33 ×10 −165 ;CaSiNo p= 6 .91 ×10 −149 ;Deal or No Deal p= 9 .24 ×10 −42 .

CaSiNo improves nearly tenfold from 5.6% to 54 .2% ; and Deal-or-No-Deal advances from 67 .5% to 88 .7% ,simultaneously eliminating the residual frontier distance of 0.0153 left by the unguided model. The significance of these improvements is confirmed by the Wilcoxon signed-rank test (reported in the footnote of Table 6). Across all three datasets, p-values are highly significant ( p < 0.001 ), formally es-tablishing that the guided and unguided Nash product distributions are statistically distinct and that the improvement is not attributable to random variation. 

5.3. Latent Trajectory Dynamics and Stabilization 

Beyond final-outcome metrics, step-wise analysis of the latent state ut provides mechanistic insight into how the guidance framework achieves normative compliance. Aggregate trajectory statistics (mean ±1

standard deviation across 30 test cases) are shown in Figure 5; individual case trajectories are examined in Figure 6. Without the two stabilization mechanisms described in Section 3.2, applying the log-barrier gradient 

∇ˆu0 Lguide directly to the DDIM state induces severe trajectory divergence. As ˆu0 approaches the IR bound-ary ( ui → di), the Nash term LN produces unbounded gradients. Empirical tracking confirmed that without the soft-clamp (Fix-B: ut ← clip( ut, −cdrift , c drift )), the latent state accumulates up to 3.0 units of negative drift over 22 guidance steps, collapsing IR Compliance to 0% and generating out-of-distribution utility es-timates. Additionally, returning the DDIM output rather than ˆuguided  

> 0

at the terminal step (the pre-Fix-A behavior) discards all normative corrections, since uout = ˆ ε when ¯αnext = 0 .With both mechanisms applied, gradient-normalized guidance maintains structural integrity throughout the reverse process. As observed in the aggregate Nash Product panels (Figure 5, left column), the guided and unguided ˆu0 estimates follow identical trajectories during the initial unguided steps — confirming that the base denoiser is undisturbed. Upon crossing t/T = tstart , the gradient norm ∥∇ ˆu0 Lguide ∥2 activates and grows monotonically. The latent state smoothly redirects from the biased empirical mean, halting joint surplus decay and converging to a strictly higher Nash product. The symmetric soft-clamp mitigates residual numerical overflow, preventing the compounding drift that would otherwise violate utility boundary constraints. Individual trajectory analysis (Figure 6) provides a micro-level view of the geometric steering mechanism across four test cases. Tracking ˆu0 in utility space (Row 1) reveals how guidance corrects off-frontier drift: in Case 2, the unguided trajectory terminates well inside the feasible set at a suboptimal Nash product, while the guided trajectory steers onto the Pareto arc. In Case 4, where the unguided model overshoots the feasible set, the projection ΠF restores feasibility. The Nash product evolution (Row 2) highlights temporal dynamics: upon entering the guidance window (green band), the guided trajectory consistently terminates closer to the theoretical NBS (dotted line) than the unguided baseline. Row 3 confirms that Frontier Distance converges to near zero for both modes — establishing that the MLP denoiser sθ independently achieves Pareto proximity; the role of Lguide is directional (Nash-optimal position on the frontier) rather than general feasibility enforcement. The gradient norm (Row 4) grows monotonically from step 35 to 50, consistent with the adaptive weighting w = λ√¯αt:as ¯αt increases toward unity in the low-noise regime, guidance strength increases precisely when the clean estimate ˆu0 is most reliable. 16 Figure 5: Aggregate trajectory statistics (mean ±1 std, n = 30 test cases) for guided (green) and unguided (orange) DDIM chains across the three negotiation domains. The green shaded band indicates the active guidance window ( t/T < t start ). Top (Synthetic NTU): IR Compliance (right panel) shows the unguided model suffering from late-stage cumulative drift, while the guided chain maintains strict 1.000 compliance throughout the window. Middle (Deal or No Deal): Nash Product (left panel) diverges from the unguided baseline upon entering the guidance window, arresting joint surplus decay. Bottom (CaSiNo): Frontier Distance (center panel) shows synchronized convergence to zero for both modes, confirming that the MLP denoiser independently places samples near the Pareto arc; guidance provides directional (Nash-optimal) correction, not general feasibility correction. 

5.4. Comparison with Baseline Methods 

We evaluate the guided graph diffusion framework against six baseline approaches, encompassing direct regression models, conventional generative architectures, and structural ablations of the proposed system. All baselines are trained and assessed on identical dataset partitions (80/10/10 train/validation/test, random seed 42), with utilities normalized to [0 , 1] 2, and performance metrics computed over 500 held-out test instances. Table 7 reports IR Compliance and Nash Efficiency for each method across the three negotiation domains. 17 Figure 6: Latent trajectory dynamics — 4 representative cases (Synthetic NTU, S = 50 visualization steps). 

Each column is an independent negotiation scenario; guided (green) and unguided (orange) trajectories share identical noise initializations so that differences are attributable solely to ∇ˆu0 Lguide . Row 1: Utility-space path of ˆu0 over denoising steps; color intensity encodes progress (light → dark). Stars ( ⋆) and diamonds ( ⋄) mark guided and unguided terminal allocations; the dashed arc is the Pareto frontier; red crosses mark disagreement points d. Row 2: Nash product Q

> i

(ˆ u0,i − di) per step; green band = guidance window; dotted line = theoretical NBS. Row 3: Distance of ˆu0 to the Pareto frontier — both modes converge to ≈0, confirming that the MLP denoiser achieves frontier proximity independently; guidance provides Nash-directional, not feasibility, correction. Row 4: Guidance gradient norm ∥∇ ˆu0 Lguide ∥2, zero outside the guidance window and growing monotonically within it due to the adaptive weighting w = λ√ ¯αt.

As established in Section 5.2, the guided graph diffusion model achieves 100% IR compliance and the highest Nash Efficiency across all domains. Table 7 contextualizes this performance against baseline methods. On the Synthetic NTU dataset, the guided model ( 99 .45% ) outperforms the strongest deep generative baseline (Conditional GAN, 39 .63% ) by 59.8% points. On the empirical corpora (CaSiNo and Deal or No Deal), the guided model maintains this performance advantage while preserving strict IR compliance, demonstrating an adherence to axiomatic boundaries not observed in the unguided generative baselines. To understand the source of this performance gap, we first examine the behavior of established generative architectures operating without normative constraints. On the Synthetic NTU dataset, the Conditional GAN achieves 39 .63% Nash Efficiency and the CVAE 33 .88% . However, on the CaSiNo corpus, both architectures yield near-zero efficiency (CVAE 0.03% , Conditional GAN 0.00% ). This reduction reflects a structural limitation of unconstrained generative models: they simply replicate the suboptimal bargaining distributions 18 Table 7: Comparison of baseline methods on IR Compliance (%) and Nash Efficiency (%). Higher is better for both metrics. Nash Efficiency is normalized per-instance by the SLSQP solution u∗                                                               

> NBS ; a score of 100% indicates exact recovery of NBS.
> †SLSQP requires full frontier knowledge at inference time and is not deployable; its Nash Efficiency is 100% by definition (serving as the normalization reference) and is shown for completeness only.
> Method Synthetic NTU CaSiNo Deal or No Deal IR (%) Nash Eff. (%) IR (%) Nash Eff. (%) IR (%) Nash Eff. (%)
> SLSQP Oracle †[34] 100.0 def. 100.0 def. 100.0 def.
> Supervised MLP 100.0 40.10 100.0 0.03 100.0 61.83 CVAE [22] 98.4 33.88 100.0 0.03 100.0 62.46 Conditional GAN [23] 100.0 39.63 100.0 0.00 100.0 68.41 Unguided DDIM (ours, no guidance) 93.9 24.29 100.0 5.64 100.0 67.47 Projection DDIM (ours, post-hoc) 100.0 50.55 100.0 5.90 100.0 65.72 Hard-constraint DDIM (ours, tstart = 1 )99.8 59.29 100.0 45.66 100.0 88.12
> Guided DDIM (ours, tstart <1)100.0 99.45 100.0 54.24 100.0 88.67

present in empirical training data, producing allocations that are individually rational but Nash-inefficient. The guided model mitigates this reliance on empirical priors via its differentiable normative loss, achieving 

54 .24% on the same corpus. On Deal or No Deal, the GAN achieves 68 .41% and the CVAE 62 .46% , remaining 

20 .3 and 26 .2% points below the guided model ( 88 .67% ). Furthermore, neither of the generative baselines ensures strict IR compliance across all tested domains. Beyond probabilistic generation, direct regression approaches face similar empirical pitfalls. The Super-vised MLP baseline constitutes a direct regression model that utilizes the same GATv2 encoder, conditioned on agent-specific features. It attains 40 .10% efficiency on Synthetic NTU and 61 .83% on Deal or No Deal, but drops to only 0.03% on CaSiNo. Owing to its training via a mean squared error (MSE) loss with respect to human-generated utility targets, the MLP predominantly learns to reproduce average empirical human allocation behaviors, including systematic under-claiming. These findings suggest that the observed performance gap between supervised methods and the guided model on human datasets stems from the fundamental distinction between imitating realized human outcomes and explicitly optimizing with respect to a normative objective. Having established the limitations of external baselines, three structural variants of the proposed method are examined to isolate the contributions of key internal design choices. First, the Unguided DDIM baseline (24 .29% , 5.64% , 67 .47% ) quantifies the effect of the denoiser in isolation: it generates samples that are close to the Pareto frontier but does not implement any Nash-directional adjustment. Second, the Projection DDIM baseline introduces guidance only as a single post-processing operation, in which the final unguided sample is projected onto the Pareto frontier using SLSQP. On CaSiNo, this configuration attains 5.90% 

efficiency, which is comparable to the unguided baseline ( 5.64% ). This outcome indicates that iterative guidance is essential; a one-time post-hoc correction applied to an empirically biased sample is insufficient to achieve the optimal projection target. Third, the Hard-constraint DDIM variant applies guidance at every reverse diffusion step ( tstart = 1 ). On Synthetic NTU, it attains 59 .29% efficiency, which is substantially lower than the full model’s 99 .45% , and it induces a reduction in IR compliance to 99 .8% . This degradation empirically supports the use of the tstart activation window: an overly restrictive gradient field at high noise levels interferes with mathematical feasibility. Constraining guidance to only the final fraction of diffusion steps permits the denoiser to first attain Pareto proximity before the Nash-directional correction is enforced. On Deal or No Deal, the efficiency difference is markedly smaller ( 88 .12% vs. 88 .67% ), suggesting that the dataset’s discrete item structure reduces its sensitivity to the specific guidance activation schedule. Finally, the normative superiority of the guided framework must be weighed against its computational demands. Generative baseline models (CVAE, Conditional GAN, and Supervised MLP) require only a single forward pass through the neural network at inference time. In contrast, the guided DDIM procedure necessitates S ∈ [10 , 15] sequential denoising steps, leading to a commensurate increase in computational latency. Nonetheless, on empirical datasets such as CaSiNo, where single-step generative approaches exhibit near-zero normative efficiency, this additional computational burden constitutes a necessary trade-off of 19 inference speed for enhanced normative robustness. In particular, attaining a Nash Efficiency of 54 .24% 

while simultaneously guaranteeing 100% IR compliance was not achieved by any single-pass architecture evaluated within this framework. 

6. Discussion 

The empirical results validate the core hypothesis that equipping deep generative models with differen-tiable normative guidance effectively overcomes historical biases in human bargaining data. By decoupling relational state encoding from generative search, the guided graph diffusion framework bridges the gap between the strict axiomatic guarantees of cooperative game theory and the representational capacity of modern deep learning. This architecture directly addresses the structural deficiencies that have historically limited autonomous negotiation systems. The most consequential finding is the severe efficiency degradation of standard generative baselines on the human centric CaSiNo corpus. While these unconstrained models perform adequately on synthetic datasets with exact Pareto frontiers, they collapse to near zero efficiency when trained on actual human negotia-tions. This dichotomy highlights a structural limitation of purely data-driven agents. Human bargaining is boundedly rational [5], characterized by risk aversion [7], anchoring [6], and a tendency to accept suboptimal interior point outcomes. Consequently, training corpora densely record biased allocation behavior. When standard architectures minimize divergence objectives against these datasets, they merely replicate this suboptimality. The supervised baseline exhibits the same failure mode through mean squared error regression. Our framework circumvents this trap by utilizing empirical data solely to map the feasible set while relying on the guidance loss to navigate toward the Pareto efficient. The massive efficiency gap between the guided model and unconstrained baselines confirms that differentiable steering is essential for recovering high surplus outcomes when human behavior cannot serve as a normative target. Ablation studies illuminate the mechanical advantage of iterative guided diffusion over naive constraint enforcement. The poor performance of the post hoc projection baseline demonstrates that distributional collapse is structurally embedded in the generative sample. A single radial projection onto the Pareto frontier cannot recover optimal joint surplus because it lacks the Nash directional information required to locate the correct point on the frontier arc. Guided diffusion addresses this through a two phase dynamic. Restricting guidance to the final low noise steps allows the unconditional score network to first establish a Pareto proximate distribution. Subsequently, normative gradients execute fine grained directional optimization. This directional correction requires only the gradient of the guidance loss computed from the disagreement vector, avoiding the need for explicit analytical knowledge of the Pareto frontier geometry. Deploying autonomous agents in high-stakes domains like supply chain procurement [35] or legal dispute resolution [36] requires strict mathematical guarantees. A system must ensure that no generated outcome is worse than the best alternative to a negotiated agreement for any agent [16]. Our framework demonstrates exceptional reliability in maintaining individual rationality compliance across the evaluated domains, without requiring hard constraint projections that over constrain the trajectory. Instead, the softplus based penalty provides a continuous repulsive force away from the boundary. Furthermore, because the encoder explicitly models relational asymmetries, the framework naturally supports counterfactual fairness audits [30], allowing practitioners to quantify how structural imbalances propagate to final allocations. Despite its strong empirical performance, the framework has boundary conditions that inform future research. First, the sequential iterative denoising adds minor inference latency, precluding deployment in ultra-low latency environments like high-frequency automated bidding. Second, the formulation assumes fully observable disagreement vectors and priority weights. Extending the guidance mechanism to operate under uncertainty via probabilistic belief distributions represents a critical next step [37]. Third, the optimal guidance step size hit the upper boundary of the search grid, suggesting that expanding the parameter sweep may yield even higher efficiencies. Fourth, while the graph encoder naturally scales to multilateral settings involving multiple parties, the geometric dynamics of guidance gradients in higher dimensional utility spaces require rigorous empirical validation. Finally, the frontier distance metric used in evaluation only penalizes outward overshoot beyond the unit ball, failing to discriminate between optimal frontier samples and those concentrated near the origin. Consequently, Nash Efficiency remains the sole reliable indicator of geometric progress toward the theoretical optimum. 20 7. Conclusion and Future Work 

This paper introduced a guided graph diffusion framework for constructing equitable utility vectors in bilateral automated negotiation. The framework combines a graph attention encoder that captures asym-metric agent attributes in a relational representation, a conditional diffusion model that generates utility vectors in continuous space, and a composite normative guidance loss that enforces individual rationality and maximizes joint surplus throughout the reverse process. A design utilizing late activation withholds normative corrections until the final stage of generation. This allows the model to establish a structure proximate to the Pareto frontier before applying directional refinements toward the NBS. Evaluation across three datasets confirms the effectiveness of this approach. On synthetic data with exactly computable optima, the framework achieves 99.45% Nash Efficiency and 100% individual rationality compliance. This performance falls within 0.55% points of an oracle solver that requires full Pareto fron-tier knowledge. On empirical corpora derived from human negotiators, unconstrained generative baselines collapse to near zero efficiency. In contrast, the proposed framework achieves 54.24% and 88.67% Nash Efficiency on the CaSiNo and Deal or No Deal datasets respectively, while maintaining perfect individual rationality compliance across all evaluation domains. Ablation studies confirm that the activation timing of the guidance window is the most influential architectural parameter. Applying normative corrections from the start of generation degrades Nash Efficiency by up to 40% points and introduces individual rationality violations. Two limitations bound the scope of the current framework. First, the complete information assumption requires the disagreement point and priority weights of each agent to be known at inference time, which may not hold in adversarial settings. Second, the sequential denoising process introduces inference latency relative to single-pass baselines. This tradeoff is justified by the normative gains achieved on biased corpora but remains a practical consideration for real time deployment. Future work will pursue two primary extensions. The framework will be extended from bilateral to multilateral negotiations. While the graph attention encoder generalizes to graphs of arbitrary size, the denoiser output dimension and the guidance loss projection are currently designed for two agents. Extending the architecture to multiple parties requires redesigning both components alongside managing the increased gradient variance associated with a higher dimensional Nash product. Furthermore, the guidance mechanism will be adapted for incomplete information settings by operating over a probabilistic belief state for the hidden attributes of each agent. This adaptation will enable deployment in environments where outside options and priorities are only partially observable. 

Declaration of Competing Interest 

The author declares that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. 

Declaration of Generative AI and AI Assisted Technologies in the Writing Process 

During the preparation of this work the author used generative artificial intelligence technologies solely to improve language clarity and readability. After using these tools, the author reviewed and edited the content as needed and takes full responsibility for the final content of the publication. 

Data Availability 

The empirical datasets analyzed during the current study, specifically the CaSiNo human negotiation corpus and the Deal or No Deal corpus, are publicly available from their respective original creators. The synthetic utility dataset generated during the current study is available from the corresponding author on reasonable request. 21 Code Availability 

The computational code required to reproduce the guided graph diffusion framework, the baseline models, and the experimental results presented in this study is available from the corresponding author on reasonable request. 

References 

[1] C. M. Jonker, R. Aydoğan, T. Baarslag, K. Fujita, T. Ito, K. Hindiks, Automated negotiating agents competition (anac), in: Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI’17, AAAI Press, 2017, p. 5070–5072. [2] M. Vaccaro, M. Caosun, H. Ju, S. Aral, J. R. Curhan, Advancing ai negotiations: A large-scale au-tonomous negotiation competition, arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.06416 (2025). [3] J. F. Nash, Jr., The bargaining problem, Econometrica 18 (2) (1950) 155–162. URL https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/0012-9682(195004)18:2&lt;155:TBP&gt;2.0. CO;2-H 

[4] A. Rubinstein, Perfect equilibrium in a bargaining model, Econometrica 50 (1) (1982) 97–109. doi: 10.2307/1912531 .[5] H. A. Simon, A behavioral model of rational choice, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 69 (1) (1955) 99–118. doi:10.2307/1884852 .[6] A. Tversky, D. Kahneman, Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases, Science 185 (4157) (1974) 1124–1131. doi:10.1126/science.185.4157.1124 .[7] D. Kahneman, A. Tversky, Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk, Econometrica 47 (2) (1979) 263–291. doi:10.2307/1914185 .[8] E. Ntoutsi, P. Fafalios, U. Gadiraju, V. Iosifidis, W. Nejdl, M.-E. Vidal, S. Ruggieri, F. Turini, S. Pa-padopoulos, E. Krasanakis, et al., Bias in data-driven artificial intelligence systems—an introductory survey, Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery 10 (3) (2020) e1356. 

doi:10.1002/widm.1356 .[9] S. M. Dinnar, C. Dede, E. Johnson, C. Straub, K. Korjus, Artificial intelligence and technology in teaching negotiation, Negotiation Journal 37 (1) (2021) 65–82. doi:10.1111/nejo.12351 .[10] J. Kramár, T. Eccles, I. Gemp, A. Tacchetti, K. R. McKee, M. Malinowski, T. Graepel, Y. Bachrach, Negotiation and honesty in artificial intelligence methods for the board game of diplomacy, Nature Communications 13 (1) (2022) 7214. doi:10.1038/s41467-022-34473-5 .[11] K. Chawla, J. Ramirez, R. Clever, G. Lucas, J. May, J. Gratch, Casino: A corpus of campsite negotiation dialogues for automatic negotiation systems, in: Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Association for Computational Linguistics, Online, 2021, pp. 3167–3185. doi:10.18653/v1/2021. naacl-main.254 .URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.naacl-main.254/ 

[12] B. M. Renting, T. Moerland, C. M. Jonker, Towards general negotiation strategies with end-to-end reinforcement learning (2024). arXiv:2406.15096 .[13] S. Brody, U. Alon, E. Yahav, How attentive are graph attention networks?, in: International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=F72ximsx7C1 

22 [14] J. Song, C. Meng, S. Ermon, Denoising diffusion implicit models, in: International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=St1giarCHLP 

[15] M. Lewis, D. Yarats, Y. N. Dauphin, D. Parikh, D. Batra, Deal or no deal? end-to-end learning of negotiation dialogues, in: Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), Association for Computational Linguistics, 2017, pp. 2443–2453. [16] R. Fisher, W. L. Ury, B. Patton, Getting to Yes: Negotiating Agreement Without Giving In, Houghton Mifflin, Boston, MA, 1981. [17] R. B. Myerson, Two-person bargaining problems with incomplete information, Econometrica 52 (2) (1984) 461–487. doi:10.2307/1911499 .[18] T. Baarslag, K. Hindriks, M. Hendrikx, A. Dirkzwager, C. Jonker, Decoupling negotiating agents to explore the space of negotiation strategies, in: Novel Insights in Agent-based Complex Automated Negotiation, Springer, 2014, pp. 61–80. doi:10.1007/978-4-431-54758-7_4 .[19] H. He, D. Chen, A. Balakrishnan, P. Liang, Decoupling strategy and generation in negotiation dia-logues, in: Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-ing (EMNLP), Association for Computational Linguistics, 2018, pp. 2333–2343. doi:10.18653/v1/ D18-1256 .[20] D. M. Ziegler, N. Stiennon, J. Wu, T. B. Brown, A. Radford, D. Amodei, P. Christiano, G. Irving, Fine-tuning language models from human preferences, arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.08593 (2019). URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1909.08593 

[21] K. Cao, A. Lazaridou, M. Lanctot, J. Z. Leibo, K. Tuyls, S. Clark, Emergent communication through negotiation, in: International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2018. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Hk6WhagRW 

[22] K. Sohn, H. Lee, X. Yan, Learning structured output representation using deep conditional generative models, in: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), Vol. 28, Curran Associates, 2015, pp. 3483–3491. URL https://papers.nips.cc/paper/2015/hash/8d55a249e6baa5c06772297520da2051-Abstract. html 

[23] M. Mirza, S. Osindero, Conditional generative adversarial nets, arXiv preprint arXiv:1411.1784 (2014). URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1411.1784 

[24] J. Ho, A. Jain, P. Abbeel, Denoising diffusion probabilistic models, in: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), Vol. 33, Curran Associates, 2020, pp. 6840–6851. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.11239 

[25] P. Dhariwal, A. Q. Nichol, Diffusion models beat GANs on image synthesis, in: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), Vol. 34, Curran Associates, 2021, pp. 8780–8794. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2105.05233 

[26] J. Ho, T. Salimans, Classifier-free diffusion guidance, in: NeurIPS 2021 Workshop on Deep Generative Models and Downstream Applications, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.12598 

[27] E. Hoogeboom, V. G. Satorras, C. Vignac, M. Welling, Equivariant diffusion for molecule generation in 3D, in: Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), PMLR, 2022, pp. 8867–8887. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.17003 

[28] C. Dwork, M. Hardt, T. Pitassi, O. Reingold, R. Zemel, Fairness through awareness, in: Proceedings of the 3rd Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science Conference (ITCS), ACM, 2012, pp. 214–226. 

doi:10.1145/2090236.2090255 .23 [29] M. Hardt, E. Price, N. Srebro, Equality of opportunity in supervised learning, in: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), Vol. 29, Curran Associates, 2016, pp. 3315–3323. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1610.02413 

[30] M. J. Kusner, J. R. Loftus, C. Russell, R. Silva, Counterfactual fairness, in: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), Vol. 30, Curran Associates, 2017, pp. 4066–4076. [31] S. Brody, U. Alon, E. Yahav, How attentive are graph attention networks? (2022). arXiv:2105.14491 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2105.14491 

[32] J. Song, C. Meng, S. Ermon, Denoising diffusion implicit models, arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.02502 (2020). [33] D. Kraft, A software package for sequential quadratic programming, Tech. Rep. DFVLR-FB 88-28, Deutsche Forschungs- und Versuchsanstalt für Luft- und Raumfahrt (DFVLR), Köln, Germany (1988). [34] P. Virtanen, R. Gommers, T. E. Oliphant, M. Haberland, T. Reddy, D. Cournapeau, E. Burovski, P. Peterson, W. Weckesser, J. Bright, S. J. van der Walt, M. Brett, J. Wilson, K. J. Millman, N. Mayorov, A. R. J. Nelson, E. Jones, R. Kern, E. Larson, C. J. Carey, İ. Polat, Y. Feng, E. W. Moore, J. VanderPlas, D. Laxalde, J. Perktold, R. Cimrman, I. Henriksen, E. A. Quintero, C. R. Harris, A. M. Archibald, A. H. Ribeiro, F. Pedregosa, P. van Mulbregt, SciPy 1.0 Contributors, SciPy 1.0: Fundamental algorithms for scientific computing in Python, Nature Methods 17 (2020) 261–272. doi:10.1038/s41592-019-0686-2 .[35] T. Sandholm, Automated negotiation, Commun. ACM 42 (3) (1999) 84–85. doi:10.1145/295685. 295866 .URL https://doi.org/10.1145/295685.295866 

[36] E. Bellucci, J. Zeleznikow, Developing negotiation decision support systems that support mediators: A case study of the Family Winner system, Artificial Intelligence and Law 13 (2) (2006) 233–271. 

doi:10.1007/s10506-006-9013-1 .[37] M. E. Schweitzer, R. Croson, Curtailing deception: The impact of direct questions on lies and omissions, International Journal of Conflict Management 10 (3) (1999) 225–248. doi:10.1108/eb022826 .24